JAWS Braille

Table of Contents

JAWS and Braille Overview

BrailleIn

Braille Study Mode

Braille Display Modes

Auto Advance Mode

Status Cells

Braille Flash Messages

Selecting Text on a Braille Display

Linking and Unlinking the Cursor

JAWS Specific Braille Abbreviations

Braille Formatting

Adjusting Braille Options

Braille Viewer

Adding and Modifying Braille Symbols

Focus Series

Focus Braille Displays

Focus Overview

Controls for Focus 14, Focus 40, and Focus 80 Blue

Controls for the Classic Focus 40 Blue

Controls for Focus 40 and 80

Controls for Focus 44, 70, and 84

Braille Display Input Commands

Focus Braille Commands

Focus Windows Commands

Focus JAWS Commands

Focus Application Specific Commands

Focus Bluetooth Connection

Braille Lite M20

Braille Lite M40

Type Lite

Braille Lite 2000

Braille Lite 40

PAC Mate Portable Braille Display

Alva

ALVA Introduction

Navigation and Display Modes

ALVA Satellite Series

Quick reference ALVA Satellite Series

Key Names for the ALVA Satellite Series

Key Assignments for the ALVA Satellite Series

Installation of the ALVA Satellite Series

ABT3 and ALVA Delphi Series

Quick Reference ABT3 and ALVA Delphi Series

Keynames for ABT 3 and ALVA Delphi Series

Key assignments for the ABT 3 and ALVA Delphi Series

Installation of the ALVA ABT3 and Delphi Series

ALVA MPO Series

Quick Reference ALVA MPO Series

Key Names for the ALVA MPO Series

Key Assignments for the ALVA MPO Series

Installation of the ALVA MPO Series

BRAILLEX Compact/Tiny/2D Lite

BRAILLEX EL Displays

BRAILLEX 2D Screen

BrailleNote

Introduction and Setup

BrailleNote Command Summary

Braille Voyager

Braille Window

Handy Tech

Handy Tech - General Information

Contacting Handy Tech

Handy Tech Bookworm

Handy Tech Braille Star 40, Braille Star 80, and Braillino

Handy Tech Braille Wave

Handy Tech Modular Evolution

Handy Tech Modular System

RBT/Rabbit 40

JAWS and Braille Overview

Using JAWS with a braille display offers tactile access to your computer screen. This multi-sensory approach adds an essential dimension to your computer experience as you are more able to fully conceptualize your Windows operating system. Keys on your braille display allow multidirectional movement on your computer screen while drop-down menus, dialog boxes, and edit fields are shown on your braille display.

JAWS has many features to enhance braille reading with your display. You can modify how Structured Mode displays dialog controls. You can also adjust JAWS to display text attributes, such as color, italics, bold, etc. You can also specify your braille displays panning increment and text alignment. To learn more about JAWS and the controls that set your braille display, explore the Braille Basic Settings dialog found in the Options Menu. If you are interested in adjusting braille controls that are specific to an application, explore the Braille Group Options found in the Braille group of Settings Center.

If you have a Freedom Scientific Focus or PAC Mate braille display, JAWS will automatically detect and begin sending information to the display as soon as you connect it to your computer. In order to use a braille display from another manufacturer, you must first add it through the JAWS Synthesizer and Braille Manager. Refer to your braille display documentation for more information on adding your display for use with JAWS.

If you use JAWS with more than one display, and the display can be connected over USB or Bluetooth, you can switch between braille displays without first having to restart JAWS. For instance, if you are using a Focus 40 Blue over a Bluetooth connection and you establish a USB connection with another display, JAWS will begin using the braille display that is connected over USB. If you then disconnect the USB display and power on the Focus 40 Blue, JAWS will switch back to the Bluetooth connection with the Focus Blue.

To get the most out of your braille display while using JAWS, select a link below or contact your braille display dealer.

The following topics discuss using JAWS with braille displays.

General

·         BrailleIn

·         Braille Display Input Commands

·         Braille Study Mode

·         Braille Display Modes

·         Status Cells

·         Braille Flash Messages

·         Linking and Unlinking the Cursor

·         JAWS Specific Braille Abbreviations

·         Braille Formatting

·         Adjusting Braille Settings on the Fly

Freedom Scientific Braille Displays and Notetakers

·         PAC Mate Portable Braille Display

·         Focus Braille Displays

·         Braille Lite M20

·         Braille Lite M40

·         Type Lite

·         Braille Lite 2000

·         Braille Lite 40

Other Braille Displays 

·         Alva

·         Braille Note

·         Braille Window

·         Braille Voyager

·         Braillex 2d Screen

·         Braillex Compact Tiny 2d Lite

·         Braillex EL Displays

·         Handy Tech Bookworm

·         Handy Tech Braille Star 40, Braille Star 80, and Braillino

·         Handy Tech Braille Wave

·         Handy Tech Modular Evolution

·         Handy Tech Modular System

·         Rbt Rabbit 40

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

BrailleIn

The BrailleIn™ feature allows you to use only your Perkins-style braille keyboard to control your computer using both Windows and application specific commands. In addition, you can also enter both contracted and uncontracted braille input from your braille display’s keyboard. The advantage is that you no longer have to switch between your computer’s keyboard and your display’s keyboard, or enter a special typing mode in order to use contracted braille to run your computer or programs. For a list of keystrokes that support Freedom Scientific’s braille displays, visit Braille Display Input Commands. For other braille displays, contact the manufacturer for a list of keystrokes.

Typing with Contracted Braille

With BrailleIn, as you type in contracted braille using the Perkins-style keyboard, your input is immediately translated back as normal text in the current e-mail, document, or form. If an application or specific edit box does not support contracted braille, JAWS announces “Computer Braille” when tutor messages are enabled. In addition, the Computer Braille start symbol, dots 4-5-6 followed by dots 3-4-6, is shown on the braille display to indicate when Computer Braille is required.

Computer braille input is selected by default. To use contracted braille, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+F2, and select Settings Center.

2.    To apply changes to all applications, press CTRL+SHIFT+D to load the JAWS default settings. To apply changes to a specific application, select it from the Applications combo box.

3.    In the Search edit box, type "Translation" without the quotes.

4.    Press DOWN ARROW to move to Translation in the filtered search results in the tree view and press ENTER to move focus to the Translation group. Press RIGHT ARROW to expand the group.

5.    Press SPACEBAR to cycle through the different settings in the Output combo box to configure the mode for reading braille on your display.
 The first option is always Computer Braille. The other available options depend on the currently selected language. For example, when the language is set to English United States, which is the default setting, the available output modes are U.S. English Grade 1, U.S. English Grade 2, Unified English Braille Grade 1, and Unified English Braille Grade 2. If you set the language to French, the available modes are French Grade 1 and French Grade 2. The default output mode is Computer Braille.

6.    Press SPACEBAR to cycle through the different settings in the Input combo box to specify the input mode used when typing braille from the Perkins-style keyboard on your display.
 The first option is always Computer Braille. The other available option depends on the currently selected output mode. For instance, if you have chosen to display Unified English Braille Grade 2, then you can choose to type in either Computer Braille or Unified English Braille Grade 2. The default input mode is Computer Braille. This setting is not available if the selected output mode is Computer Braille, or the selected output mode does not support input.

7.    Choose OK to save your changes and close Settings Center.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Study Mode

Braille Study Mode is a training tool for teaching and learning braille. It works exclusively with Freedom Scientific PAC Mate Portable Braille Displays and Focus braille displays. When Braille Study Mode is on, JAWS will announce the current braille character in a display cell when you press the Cursor Routing button immediately above that cell. When you press the particular Cursor Routing button in conjunction with the left or right selector button (Focus 40 Blue and Focus 14 Blue braille displays), or the Navrow button (located behind the Cursor Routing button on the PAC Mate Portable Braille Display, Classic Focus 40 Blue, and Focus 40 and 80 braille displays), JAWS will announce and spell the braille word.

Turning On Braille Study Mode

Braille Study Mode is off by default. To start it, do the following:

1.    Make sure that a PAC Mate Portable Braille Display, or Focus braille display is attached to your computer.

2.    Press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings.

3.    In the Search edit box, type "study mode" without the quotes.

4.    Press DOWN ARROW to move to Study Mode in the tree view, and then press SPACEBAR to toggle Study Mode on. Braille Study Mode remains on until toggled off or until JAWS is restarted.

On-the-Fly Access to Braille Study Mode

When Braille Study Mode is disabled, you can always press a cursor routing button in conjunction with the Mode or Selector buttons on the Focus 40 Blue and Focus 14 Blue, or the left or right WhizWheel together with either a Cursor Routing or Navrow button on the PAC Mate Portable Braille Display, Classic Focus 40 Blue, and Focus 40 and 80 braille displays to briefly use Braille Study Mode functionality. This is useful when you need a quick reminder, but you do not want to go through the process of turning on Braille Study Mode as previously described.

To use Braille Study Mode on the fly using the Focus 40 Blue or Focus 14 Blue braille display, do one of the following:

·         Press MODE+CURSOR ROUTING to make JAWS announce the braille character in the display cell, or

·         Press CURSOR ROUTING+SELECTOR to make JAWS announce and spell the braille word.

To use Braille Study Mode on the fly using the PAC Mate Portable Braille Display, Classic Focus 40 Blue, and Focus 40 and 80, do one of the following:

·         Press WHIZWHEEL+CURSOR ROUTING to make JAWS announce the braille character in the display cell, or

·         Press WHIZWHEEL+NAVROW to make JAWS announce and spell the braille word.

Note: JAWS returns to normal operation after announcing the braille character or word.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Display Modes

With JAWS your braille display can be in one of four modes: Structured, Line, Speech Output, and Attribute. Most displays have a key that cycles between these modes.

Structured Mode

Line Mode

Speech Output Mode

Attribute Mode

Structured Mode

Structured Mode gives you descriptive information about the current dialog and/or control. If there is no special descriptive information, such as in a text document, the braille display behaves as if it were in Line Mode. By default, JAWS is configured to use Structured Mode.

Structured Mode is designed to provide one or two lines of descriptive information about menu dialogs and their controls. The additional information offered in Structured Mode is particularly helpful because it lets you navigate the dialog and its controls faster. When specific dialog and/or control type information is in focus, JAWS uses braille and specific braille abbreviations to compose a "structured line" that describes the screen information on your braille display. JAWS also attempts to position the structured line on the display so the most relevant information, such as a prompt, appears at the beginning of the display. If Braille Follows Active is selected, JAWS switches to Line Mode when the Braille cursor moves away from the control that is in focus. This gives you an exact representation of the information on the screen. When the Braille cursor moves back to the control in focus, JAWS switches to Structured Mode.

Example of Structured Line 

After pressing ALT+ENTER on the task bar, a line similar to the following will appear on the braille display:

"chk Taskbar and Start Menu Properties Taskbar Taskbar appearance grp <x> Lock the taskbar"

This is similar to what JAWS speaks:

"Taskbar and Start Menu Properties dialog Taskbar page Taskbar appearance Lock the taskbar check box checked."

Note the special symbols and abbreviations used in the braille example. See the JAWS Specific Braille Abbreviations section for the complete list and their descriptions.

The words "Dialog," "Page," and "Check Box not checked," never appear on the screen in this situation. And since Windows is a three-dimensional graphical environment, the information shown on the braille display does not follow the order spoken by the JAWS speech synthesizer.

To observe what the information looks like without Structured Mode applied, see the Line Mode section.

Configuring Structured Mode

Using Settings Center, you can configure how information appears in Structured Mode. You can specify what information is displayed for various control types, as well as the positioning of text on the structured line

More advanced users can even modify braille control symbols, the display order in which they appear, and the braille representation of the control state. This is helpful because for each software application on your computer, you control how and what information is shown on your braille display.

To access the Structured Mode settings, Open Settings Center (INSERT+F2), expand the Braille group, and then select the Structured Mode group. You can now modify the following items.

·         Open the Include Optional Components group to configure what control info is shown on the braille display. This includes, the control type, level and position, hotkeys, hints, dialog box title information, dialog box descriptive text, and control group info.

·         Determine if JAWS will align the display to the most appropriate Structured Mode segment when a control gains focus.

·         Determine whether or not the structured line is displayed in reverse order. When reversed, the control info is shown first, followed by the group, and then the dialog box information.

·         Press the SPACEBAR on Advanced to open the Control Type Options dialog box where you can modify symbols used to represent controls on your braille display as well as the symbols used to represent the states a control can be in – such as selected or cleared for a check box.

For more information, refer to Structured Mode. For more information on configuring other braille options, see Braille Group Options.

Navigating a Structured Line

When a structured line appears on the braille display, it will be aligned with the focused control information, such as the state and label of a check box, as this is considered to be the most relevant information a user would want. You may need to PAN LEFT so you can see the title of the dialog box and the page title if it contains multiple pages. When in a structured line, your PANNING keys allow you to see any information about the structured line not showing on the display. This is especially helpful with displays containing 40 or fewer cells.

In addition, while on a structured line, you can pan by segments. For instance, the line may contain the dialog box title, the title of a group box containing several controls, and the current control that is in focus. If you are using a Freedom Scientific Focus Braille Display, you can press the SHIFT key in conjunction with the LEFT or RIGHT PANNING BUTTON to pan by structured segment. The next or previous segment will start at the far left of the display in the first cell that is not used as a status cell. If you have a braille display other than a Focus, this command can be assigned through the JAWS Keyboard Manager.

Note that in Structured Mode the BRAILLE UP and the BRAILLE DOWN keys, which navigate between controls the same way as your keyboard arrow keys, do not navigate a structured line. However, the braille routing keys do allow you to activate buttons, highlight text in an edit field, and toggle the state of check boxes.

Line Mode

Line Mode gives you an exact representation of the information on the screen, in the same way the JAWS Cursor does.

When in Line Mode, JAWS uses screen coordinates to determine what information is sent to the braille display. Using its Braille Cursor, JAWS relays information to the braille display exactly as it is formatted on the computer screen. While this helps you better understand screen layout and print format, the braille format may be confusing because Windows text can appear anywhere on the screen.

Using the example dialog from the Structured Mode section, the following would appear on the display:

When first opening the Task Bar Properties dialog:

Check mark Lock the Taskbar

Move up one line:

Task Bar Options Start Menu

Moving up one more line:

Task Bar Properties help symbol close symbol

Notice the text lines do not line up. This is because, in Line Mode, text is arranged using the Windows format. To see all the text, you may need to use the PAN RIGHT and PAN LEFT keys.

In Line Mode, JAWS provides a way for you to change how text is shown on your braille display. The default setting is 8 pixels per space. For more information on pixel space relative to white space on your braille display, see the section on braille formatting.

Speech Output Mode 

Speech Output Mode displays braille information that is generated from the speech synthesizer. This mode is beneficial to you if you are deaf and blind because you can access spoken information not visible on the computer screen. If the information filtering through the speech synthesizer is larger than ten lines, only the last part of information is displayed. In this situation, pan left to display the beginning of the text.

In Speech Output Mode, the braille movement keys let you review what is being spoken, but the cursor routing buttons have no effect.

Attribute Mode

In attribute mode, JAWS indicates all attributes assigned to a block of text with a letter or symbol. Attributes can include such changes as bold, italics, underline, and so on. This information appears in the display's status cells. When multiple attributes are assigned to the same block of text, the braille display cycles through each of them. To determine the rate at which this cycling occurs, use the Attribute Rotation Rate option, which is located in the Braille Marking group within Settings Center's Braille group.

Note: To use Attribute Mode, you must have a braille display with status cells.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Auto Advance Mode

Auto Advance Mode is equivalent to the Say All command for braille readers. The braille display is automatically panned at a specific speed through an entire document, automatically skipping over blank segments and blank lines. You can increase or decrease the speed of the panning on the fly, skip backward or forward (using panning keys on the display), or stop the mode by pressing a routing key (or changing the application focus). The length of time the display pauses before panning to the next segment depends on the length of the current braille line. For instance, the display will pan faster for short lines so you can instantly move to the next segment without having to wait once you have finished reading, but will pan slower for longer lines.

You can select the maximum length of time you want JAWS to wait before automatically panning the display. This time is adjustable from 500 milliseconds up to 20,000 milliseconds (1000 milliseconds = 1 second). By default, the maximum amount of time JAWS will pause while reading in Auto Advance Mode is 5000 milliseconds. This means that if the current braille line takes up the majority of the display, JAWS will pan the display after five seconds. If the display pans to a short line containing only a few words and the remaining cells are blank, which could occur more frequently with larger displays such as those with 40 or 80 cells, JAWS may only pause for two seconds before automatically panning to the next segment.

The Auto Advance Maximum Interval option can be configured using Settings Center. For more information, see Braille Group options.

JAWS assigns commands for Auto Advance mode to all Freedom Scientific braille displays and notetakers. For information on starting Auto Advance mode, refer to the Help topic for your specific model of Freedom Scientific braille display or notetaker:

·         Focus 14, Focus 40, and Focus 80 Blue

·         Classic Focus 40 Blue

·         Focus 40/80

·         Focus 44/70/84

·         PAC Mate Portable Braille Display

·         Braille Lite M20

·         Braille Lite M40

·         Braille Lite 2000

·         Braille Lite 40

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Status Cells

For those braille displays that have Status Cells, they are generally located on the display's left. These cells greatly enhance your Braille viewing and understanding of text formatting. The number of status cells in your Braille display determines the type and amount of information displayed.

If your braille display has five status cells, the first through third cells show your horizontal (x-axis) pixel location (if you are using an on-screen cursor), line number (if you are using the Virtual Cursor), and/or Speech Output index number (if you are using Speech Output mode). The fourth cell indicates the active cursor: PC Cursor (p), Virtual Cursor (v), JAWS Cursor (j), Invisible Cursor (i), or Braille Cursor (b). The fifth cell indicates the active Braille mode: Line (l), Structured (s), Speech Output (x), or Attribute (i).

If your braille display has four status cells, JAWS displays the same information, but does not show the active Braille mode. If your braille display has two or three status cells, JAWS displays only the active cursor and active Braille mode in the status cells.

If you are focused on a control in Structured Mode, the type of control is displayed by default in the status cells. For example, chk for check box, or btn for button would appear in the status cells when positioned on these control types. If you encounter multiple types that need to be shown in the status cells, the symbols for each individual type will be combined into a single symbol that will fit in the status area of the display. For example, if you encounter a graphic within a link, you would see ilnk. If the graphic was part of a level 1 heading, you would see ih1. If a graphical link was part of a level 2 heading, you would see ilh2, if the display has four status cells, or just ilh if the display has three status cells.

Along with Status Cells, DOTS 7 and 8 of each cell indicates the current state of text relative to your braille display.

For instance:

·         If DOTS 7 and 8 are up on all cells of your display, then the structured or current line of text is completely displayed.

·         If text is shown on only one side of your braille display, then DOTS 7 and 8 will be raised on the status cells for that side, and down for the other.

·         If there is one more line of text to be shown on the display's right, then DOTS 7 and 8 in the last status cell will be down.

·         If there is two or more full lines of text to be shown on the display's right, then DOTS 7 and 8 of the last two status cells will be down.

·         A blinking DOT 7 and a blinking DOT 8 indicates the position of the status cell and Braille cursor, which corresponds to the character on the screen.

Note: On certain braille displays, the cursor routing buttons above the status cells behave as braille keystrokes and not as cursor routing buttons. With other braille displays, including the Focus, pressing a cursor routing button above a status cell does nothing if status cells are enabled.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Flash Messages

Braille Flash Messages are short announcements that appear on your Braille display for only a few seconds. These messages can announce application start messages, error messages, help balloons, JAWS messages, smart help messages, status information, and user requested information.

Braille Flash Messages disappear automatically after a short time, but you can dismiss one at any time by pressing a cursor routing button. If you need more time to finish reading a message, press one of your Braille display's panning buttons to keep the message on the display longer.

Do the following to turn Braille Messages on or off, change the message verbosity level, and specify the length of time messages remain on the display:

1.    From the Options menu, choose Braille.

2.    Choose the Advanced button.

3.    Choose the Flash Messages button to customize the Braille Flash Messages.

For more information on these options, refer to Flash Messages.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Selecting Text on a Braille Display

JAWS allows you to use the cursor routing buttons on your Braille display to select text. Do the following to select text:

1.    Pan the Braille display until the text that you want to select appears.

2.    Hold down the LEFT SHIFT key and press the cursor routing button above the character you want to use as the beginning of the selection.

3.    Continue reading until you reach the end of the text that you want to include in the selection.

4.    Hold down the LEFT SHIFT key and press the cursor routing button above the character you want to use as the end of the selection. JAWS then selects all the text between the first and last character.

 

Different models of Braille displays may have other methods for selecting text. Refer to the documentation for your specific model of Braille display for lists of commands.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Linking and Unlinking the Cursor

There are two settings that determine how a braille display affects or is affected by the active cursor.

·         Braille Follows Active: When set, as you move through Windows, the information at the active cursor is displayed in braille. For example, when you move through the controls in a dialog, information about the active control is displayed in braille.

·         Active Follows Braille: When set, the active cursor follows the Braille Cursor. However, the Braille Cursor cannot move where the active cursor cannot go. For example, with the PC Cursor active and this option set, you cannot move the Braille Cursor to the title bar of the active window.

Each of these settings can be set permanently in Settings Center or temporarily in Quick Settings. Refer to Adjusting Braille Options for more information.

There are also commands to toggle these settings assigned to controls on most braille displays. For example, on a Focus braille display, T toggles Active Follows Braille, and F toggles Braille Follows Active. When these commands are used, the settings stay in effect until you toggle them again, or until you restart JAWS. Refer to the JAWS help topic for the braille display you use for the specific commands to toggle these settings.

More Information

In Structured Mode, JAWS often acts as though Active Follows Braille and Braille Follows Active are both enabled. In this mode, JAWS is literally sending a structured line of information to the braille display. This information is determined by what type of window or control is active, not necessarily by other settings.

Modify the Braille Follows Active and Active Follows Braille settings to change how JAWS behaves under the following circumstances:

·         While using Line Mode.

·         While using the JAWS Cursor.

·         When in Structured Mode while no structured line is present, such as within a word processing document.

Under these conditions, JAWS behaves in the following manner:

Braille Follows Active: As you navigate with your PC keyboard, the braille display shows information from the location of the active cursor. Toggle Braille Follows Active off to have your display monitor one part of a window while you work in another part of it using speech. For example, in Outlook, review the messages you have received with speech while using your braille display to monitor the number of messages displayed on the status bar.

Active Follows Braille: As you navigate with the controls on your braille display, the active cursor moves with the Braille Cursor. Turn off this setting to review other parts of the screen without moving the active cursor. This is very helpful when editing word processing files since you can review other parts of the document without moving the insertion point from where you are editing or adding information.

Braille Follows Active is on by default, and Active Follows Braille is off by default.

The Route Braille to Active command quickly returns the Braille Cursor to the location of the active cursor. Refer to the JAWS help topic for your braille display to determine the specific command.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

JAWS Specific Braille Abbreviations

The following symbols are used in Structured Mode to indicate different control types. All of these symbols can be changed using the Control Type Options dialog located in Settings Center. To open this dialog box, do the following:

1.    Open Settings Center, and type "Structured Mode advanced" without the quotes in the Search edit box.

2.    Press DOWN ARROW to move to Advanced in the filtered results in the tree view.

3.    Press SPACEBAR. The Control Type Options dialog box opens.

4.    Press CTRL+TAB to switch between the Control Properties, State Properties, and HTML Attributes pages. Refer to Defining Structured Mode for more information about these pages.

The following tables provide braille abbreviations.

Braille Abbreviations for the Control Properties in the Default.JCF File 

  -------------------------------- ----------------------------------
  Control Properties Description   Control Properties Abbreviations
  3 State Button                   3st
  Button                           btn
  Button Drop-down                 ->
  Button Drop-down Grid            ->g
  Button List Box                  btnlbx
  Button Menu                      btnmnu
  Check Box                        chk
  Clock                            clock
  Column                           col
  Column Header                    chdr
  Combo Box                        cbo
  Command Bar                      cmdbar
  Context Menu                     cntxmnu
  Desktop                          desktop lv
  Dialog                           dlg
  Edit Combo                       edcbo
  Edit                             ed
  Edit Spin Box                    spnbx
  Extended-select List Box         xlbx
  Frame                            frame
  FTP Link                         ftplnk
  Graphic                          img
  Group Box                        grp
  Header Bar                       hdb
  Heading 1                        h1
  Heading 2                        h2
  Heading 3                        h3
  Heading 4                        h4
  Heading 5                        h5
  Heading 6                        h6
  Hotkey Edit                      hk
  Icon Title                       ico
  Image Map Link                   imglnk
  IP Address Edit                  iped
  Left Right Scroll Bar            lrscb
  Left Right Slider                lrtrk
  Link                             lnk
  List Box                         lbx
  List View Item                   lv
  List View                        lv
  MDI Client                       mdi
  Menu                             mnu
  Menu Bar                         mnubar
  Multiline Edit                   mled
  Multi-select List Box            mlbx
  News Link                        nntplnk
  Outline Button                   outl btn
  Password Edit                    pwded
  PDF Signature                    sig
  Progress Bar                     progress
  Radio Button                     rbtn
  Read-only Edit                   rded
  Row Header                       rhdr
  Row                              row
  Same Page Link                   same pg lnk
  Scroll Bar                       scrlbar
  SDM Bitmap                       bmp
  SDM Dialog                       dlg
  Send Mail Link                   maillnk
  Spin Box                         spn
  Split Button                     sbtn
  Start Button                     start btn
  Start Menu                       start mnu
  Status Bar                       stb
  System Tray                      systray
  Tab Control                      tab
  Table                            tbl
  Task Bar                         taskbar
  Task Switch List                 tasks:
  Tool Bar                         tb
  Tool Tip                         tip
  Track Bar                        sld
  Tree View Item                   tv
  Tree View                        tv
  Up Down Scroll Bar               udscb
  Up Down Slider                   udtrk
  Upload Edit                      uplded
  -------------------------------- ----------------------------------

Additional Braille Abbreviations for the Control Properties in the Microsoft Outlook.JCF File

  -------------------------------- ----------------------------------
  Control Properties Description   Control Properties Abbreviations
  Calendar Grid                     
  Calendar Appointment Field        
  Messages List                    lbx
  -------------------------------- ----------------------------------

Braille Abbreviations for the State Properties in the Default.JCF File

  ------------------------------ --------------------------------
  State Properties Description   State Properties Abbreviations
  <Required>                     rq
  App CTL                        App CTL
  Checked                        <x>
  Closed                         +
  Collapsed                      +
  Disabled                       xx
  Expanded                       -
  Grayed                         xx
  Has Popup                      Has Popup
  Opened                         -
  Partially Checked              <->
  Pressed                        <=>
  Sub Menu                       ->
  Unchecked                      < >
  Visited                        vl
  ------------------------------ --------------------------------

Braille Abbreviations for the HTML Attributes in the Default.JCF File

  ----------------------------- -------------------------------
  HTML Attributes Description   HTML Attributes Abbreviations
  longdesc                      ld
  onclick                       clk
  onmouseover                   omo
  visited                       vl
  ----------------------------- -------------------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Formatting

The Toggle8PixelsPerSpace option, designed to be a convenient and efficient way to view Braille, lets you conserve space on your Braille display, so more information can be displayed at one time.

JAWS often has to estimate the number of spaces within a line or portion of a line, and it estimates this based on the width in pixels. One space is assumed for every eight pixels. Displaying Braille information in this manner provides you feedback on how this information is visually presented.

Press the Toggle 8 PixelsPerSpace key and the message "unlimited pixels per space" is spoken. Using the Unlimited Pixels Per Space option allows you to move up and down through the text, viewing the display without white space. Only the space and tab characters written into the document show as blank cells.

When 8 pixels per space is selected, each line may differ in pixel length. So using the BRAILLE UP and BRAILLE DOWN keys may not place you at the same character location as that of the preceding line.

You can change the setting at any time by using the toggle key. For more information, see your Braille display's help topic on the Toggle 8 Pixels Per Space keystroke.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Adjusting Braille Options

To temporarily adjust braille options, use Quick Settings (INSERT+V), and then use the Search box to search for braille options. The search results display in the tree view. The changes made in Quick Settings only apply to the current application or document in use. To make changes that apply globally, open Settings Center and select the Braille Options group.

Braille Mode

Use this option to control the format of the information sent to the Braille display. If you select Line, JAWS sends the line of text at the current cursor position to the Braille display. If you select Structured, JAWS sends information to the display that is relevant to the current cursor position. The information sent includes things such as control type, dialog box name, or number of items in a list. If you select Speech Output, JAWS sends the same text to the display that it sends to the synthesizer. When you select Attributes, JAWS indicates all attributes assigned to a block of text with a letter or symbol.

Eight Dot Braille

This option controls whether or not JAWS display's eight-dot braille. In eight dot braille, DOT 7 is used for capital letters in computer braille, and both DOT 7 and DOT 8 are used to represent non-alphanumeric characters. Even if eight-dot braille is turned off, braille marking is still shown if you have it turned on.

Marking Uses DOTS 7 and 8

Text attributes such as highlight, bold, italic, and underline can be marked with raised DOTS 7 and 8 on your braille display. This option controls whether or not JAWS marks text containing attributes. Select either on or off. When this option is on, you can turn various attributes on or off for marking.

Flash Messages

Use this option to turn the display of Braille Flash Messages on or off. Flash Messages are short announcements that appear on your braille display for only a few seconds. These messages can include errors, status information, help balloons and other information. See Flash Messages for more information.

Braille Keys Interrupt Speech

If you turn this option on, entering commands using the controls on your braille display interrupts JAWS if information is currently being spoken.

If this option is off, you can pan or otherwise interact with the braille display and speech is not interrupted.

Study Mode

This is a training tool for teaching and learning braille using Freedom Scientific braille displays. When Braille Study Mode is on, JAWS will announce the current braille character in a display cell when you press the Cursor Routing button immediately above that cell. When you press the Navrow button (located behind the Cursor Routing button), JAWS will announce and spell the braille word. To use Braille Study Mode, you must have a Freedom Scientific PAC Mate or Focus braille display connected to your computer. Select on to start Braille Study Mode. Select off to turn off Braille Study Mode. Braille Study Mode will remain toggled on until toggled off or until JAWS is restarted. For more information, see Braille Study Mode.

Preferred Translation Table

Use this option to cycle among your preferred braille tables. You can select the tables that appear in this list using the Braille Tables dialog box in Settings Center.

Cursor Options

This group contains options that control the relationship between the active cursor and your braille display.

Active Follows Braille

This option controls whether or not the active cursor automatically follows the braille display as it moves.

If this option is on, the braille cursor and the active cursor are linked together. When you move the braille cursor, the active cursor also moves. However, you cannot move the braille cursor where the active cursor cannot move.

With this option off, you can move the braille display to a different place in the window, away from the active cursor. You can look at a status bar, toolbar, or other information outside a document area.

Braille Follows Active

This option controls whether or not the braille display automatically follows the active cursor. When this option is on, the braille display automatically follows the cursor as you use navigation keys on the keyboard. For example, when moving through a dialog box, the braille cursor moves to each control as you press the TAB key.

Panning Options

This group contains options that control panning of your braille display and presentation of text. These options work with the relationship between the display and line length.

Pan by

This option controls how text displays as you pan with the braille display. Available settings are Automatic, Best Fit, Fixed Increment, and Maximize Text.

·         The Automatic setting allows JAWS to figure out the best way to display text while you pan.

·         Best Fit checks available space on your display and only displays what will fit logically.

·         Fixed Increment is based on the length of your display.

·         Maximize Text presents as much text as possible on the display, regardless of display length.

For more information on these options, see Braille Group options.

Word Wrap

This option controls whether or not JAWS displays part of a word, even if it cuts off at the end of the braille display. If you turn Word Wrap on, JAWS does not split a word that is too large to be shown on the braille display. When you pan to the next increment, you can read the word in its entirety. If you turn Word Wrap off, JAWS displays as much of the word as possible, but a portion may be cut off. JAWS shows the remainder of the word when you pan to the next increment.

Auto Pan

This option determines how the content of the Braille display is updated when the active cursor moves outside the area currently displayed.

·         Select Off to turn off automatic panning.

·         If you select Match Manual Panning, JAWS pans the braille display using the same method specified in the User Pan list.

·         Select Automatic to allow JAWS to choose the best method for showing text on your braille display.

For more information on these options, see Braille Group options.

Marking Options

This group contains the options that control which attributes are marked with DOT 7 and DOT 8 on your braille display. Attributes are modifications to text such as highlight, bold, underline, italic, and strike out. This group also contains options for script defined marking and color marking. Select the attributes you want to have indicated by DOTS 7 and 8 and clear the ones you do not want displayed.

Table Options

This group contains options that control table presentation on your braille display.

Table Display

This option controls how JAWS displays table text. You can display current cell, current row, or current column.

Table Show Titles

This option controls which headers, if any, are displayed for the active table cell.

Table Show Coordinates

This option controls whether coordinates for the active cell are on or off.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Viewer

The JAWS Braille Viewer provides on the computer screen the textual representation of the output received on a refreshable braille device. The application is designed to simulate a braille display and operates with or without an actual braille display present. The main purpose of Braille Viewer is to assist sighted instructors or testers that do not read braille or may not have access to a braille display. It helps to demonstrate and confirm the output information JAWS sends to these hardware devices.

Braille Viewer represents the number of cells on the currently running braille display, if one is connected and active. Note that by default, Braille Viewer represents 40 cells if no braille display is installed, or if the default braille display is not connected or turned on.

Braille Viewer is installed by default with JAWS. It is accessed by pressing WINDOWS Key to open the Start menu, and then selecting All Programs, the correct JAWS submenu version, and, finally, Braille Viewer.

When launched, an application desktop toolbar appears at the top of the screen and displays two lines. The top line contains a read-only edit field that displays in text form exactly what is being sent to the cells of a braille device. The second line contains the Braille Keys button, Exit button, and status line, which displays modes (line, structured, or speech box) and other significant information. Press the Braille Keys button to open a dialog box that shows a list of options commonly performed by pressing braille keys on a braille display, such as Pan Right or Pan Left. The toolbar can be moved to the top or the bottom of the screen, but is designed so it cannot be hidden or covered by other windows.

Braille Viewer appears in the system tray and not the taskbar. Press INSERT+F11 to access system tray icons without using a mouse.

Braille Viewer unloads when you close JAWS.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Adding and Modifying Braille Symbols

While JAWS correctly represents the most frequently used symbols in braille, you may need to modify the braille representation for certain symbols or add new ones. If you are reading a document and find that a certain symbol is misrepresented in braille, or if your braille display shows a blank cell instead of a symbol, do the following:

1.    Ensure that braille translation is disabled. This is especially important if you are working with foreign-language documents, as well as any math and science texts.

2.    Press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings and type "translation table" without the quotes in the Search edit box.

3.    Press DOWN ARROW to move to Preferred Translation Table in the Settings Tree.

4.    Press the SPACEBAR to Select an appropriate table. Be sure to choose a table with the word "unicode" in the title.

5.    Choose the OK button.

Note: If the Preferred Translation Table option in Quick Settings is unavailable, you must configure at least one additional preferred braille table using Settings Center. Refer to the Braille Tables Dialog topic for more information.

Retry reading the symbol in your document. If the symbol still appears as a blank cell, do the following:

1.    Open Settings Center (INSERT+F2), and expand the Image and Symbols group.

2.    Select the Speak Character Value in Hex check box.

3.    Choose OK to save changes and close Settings Center.

4.    Return to your document. Move the cursor to a lowercase letter "a" (type one if none are present) and press NUM PAD 5 three times quickly. JAWS should say, “Character U+61HEX”. If you hear anything else, do not proceed with these steps.

5.    Move the cursor to the character whose braille representation you want to change and press NUM PAD 5 three times quickly to obtain the hexadecimal unicode value of the character. Be sure to make a note of this value, as you will need it in the next steps.

6.    Using a text editor like Notepad, open the currently active braille table. The tables are saved in files with the extension .jbt in the folder where you installed JAWS (by default, C:\Program Files\Freedom Scientific\JAWS\X (where X is the JAWS version number)).The default braille table file is US_Unicode.jbt. The table files specify the braille representation for a number of symbols. The first section contains the basic 127 ANSI characters. It is then followed by unicode entries. The entry format is:
 
 U+XXX=YYYYYY
 
 Where XXX is the symbol’s hexadecimal unicode value, and YYYY are the braille dots representing the symbol.

7.    If you want to modify a symbol that is misrepresented in braille, then you must first find it in the braille table. Using the search feature of your text editor, try finding the relevant entry. For example, to modify the braille representation for unicode character 2018, you would need to look for the string “2018”. You would then find the following line:
 
 U+2018=34578
 
 This indicates that Unicode character 2018 is represented in braille by dots 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8. To modify a braille representation, replace the existing dot numbers with ones of your choosing.

8.    If a certain symbol does not appear at all on your display, then you can add it to the braille table. The table entries are sorted according to their hexadecimal unicode values. If you are comfortable with hexadecimal numbers, you may want to add your entry in the appropriate slot. Otherwise, just add it to the bottom of the table. For example, if the symbol is reported as, “Character U+259HEX”, and you want to represent it in braille with dots 3, 4, 6, and 8, your table entry should look like the following:
 
 U+259=3468

9.    After you have finished modifying the file, save it. Then, quit and restart JAWS. Your braille table changes should now take effect.

Related Topics:

Adding Speech for Special Symbols

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Focus

Focus refreshable braille displays provide a tactile interface to your computer. The first generation models are available with either 44, 70, or 84 cells of braille. The later generation models are available with either 14, 40, or 80 cells of braille. The following topics discuss how to use the Focus 14, Focus 40, and Focus 80 Blue, Classic Focus 40 Blue, Focus 40/80, and Focus 44/70/84 series of refreshable braille displays with JAWS.

Overview

Controls for Focus 14, Focus 40, and Focus 80 Blue

Controls for the Classic Focus 40 Blue

Controls for Focus 40 and 80

Controls for Focus 44, 70, and 84

Braille Display Input Commands

Braille Commands

Windows Commands

JAWS Commands

Application Specific Commands

Focus Bluetooth Connection

Related Topics:

Advanced Braille Display Options

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Focus Overview

The Focus series of refreshable braille displays features a number of useful controls that let you pan through documents, select text, move the cursor to a location on the screen, and more. In addition, all models provide you with a braille keyboard for entering text and performing commands. For information on using the controls of your Focus braille display with JAWS, refer to the following topics:

Controls for Focus 14, Focus 40, and Focus 80 Blue Controls for the Classic Focus 40 Blue
 Controls for Focus 40 and 80
 Controls for Focus 44, 70, and 84

Note: For an overview of Bluetooth configuration, refer to Focus Bluetooth Connection.

The information below describes the method behind the command assignments for JAWS and the Focus braille displays. Once you understand this methodology, there is no need to memorize a long list of commands. The commands are separated into JAWS commands, Windows commands, and braille commands. There is only one assignment pattern for each. Focus commands are consistently based on JAWS and Windows commands. If you are familiar with JAWS and Windows keyboard commands, Focus commands are very easy to learn. If you become familiar with Focus commands, JAWS and Windows keyboard commands are also easy to learn.

JAWS Commands

These commands are easy to learn if you are familiar with JAWS. And if you are just beginning to learn your Focus display and JAWS, these commands should help you learn JAWS keyboard commands as well.

The RIGHT SHIFT key on your Focus display corresponds to your INSERT key on the keyboard. The JAWS keyboard command to make the JAWS window active is INSERT+J, so the corresponding Focus command is RIGHT SHIFT+J (RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4-5).

Many JAWS keyboard commands use INSERT together with the function keys, F1 through F12. For keyboard commands that use INSERT+F1 through F9, just press and hold down the RIGHT SHIFT on the Focus and press the computer braille number of the function key. For example, the JAWS keyboard command to open the Run JAWS Manager dialog box is INSERT+F2, so the Focus command is RIGHT SHIFT+2 (RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3).

Refer to Focus JAWS Commands.

Windows Commands

Windows commands follow a similar convention. Many Windows commands use CTRL, ALT, or SHIFT as part of the command. On the Focus, the LEFT SHIFT key is used in these commands. The Windows keyboard command to copy selected text to the clipboard is CTRL+C, so the Focus command is LEFT SHIFT+C (LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-4).

The same letter assignments that are used with Windows commands are used for the equivalent Focus commands to make it as easy as possible to learn to use the Focus displays or to learn Windows.

Refer to Focus Windows Commands.

Braille Commands

These commands primarily change settings for your braille display. They are key combinations with the SPACEBAR, referred to as chord commands. Use the SPACEBAR like other modifiers (SHIFT, CTRL, ALT, etc.). Press SPACEBAR first, hold it down, and then press the other key or keys that are part of the command. These commands all change the settings used to format, translate, or present information on your display.

Refer to Focus Braille Commands.

Exceptions

The computer braille number and function key relationship does not apply to the List System Tray Icons command, INSERT+F11 on the keyboard. We have assigned RIGHT SHIFT+K (RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3) to this command.

The command to open the Window List dialog, INSERT+F10, is RIGHT SHIFT+0 (RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-5-6).

There are other exceptions based on availability of keys, however we have attempted to retain the logic of consistency with the JAWS or Windows commands wherever possible.

An Example

After reviewing the Focus commands, refer to Focus Navigation Example for an example of navigating with a Focus braille display.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Controls for Focus 14, Focus 40, and Focus 80 Blue

The Focus 14, Focus 40, and Focus 80 Blue braille displays provide two NAV Rockers, two mode buttons, two panning buttons, two rocker bars, two selector buttons, four panning rockers (Focus 80 Blue only), and cursor router buttons above each braille cell.

NAV Rockers and Mode Buttons

The Focus NAV Rockers allow you to move quickly through files, dialog boxes, lists, and menus. In a file, you can move by line, sentence, paragraph, or pan backward and forward. To switch between the four navigation modes, press the mode button located directly above each NAV Rocker. In a dialog box, you can move between the available controls, and even interact with them. In a menu, you can move up and down through the menu commands.

Panning Buttons

The Focus panning buttons pan left or right one display width (14, 40, or 80 cells) each time they are pressed. Press the panning button on the left front edge of the Focus, the button with a raised double left arrow symbol, to pan left; press the panning button on the right front edge of the Focus, the button with a raised double right arrow symbol, to pan right. The functions of the panning buttons can be reversed so that pressing the left panning button causes the Focus display to pan right and pressing the right panning button causes it to pan left. Please refer to help for the JAWS Keyboard Manager for details on modifying these and other control assignments.

Rocker Bars

The rocker bars provide movement up or down by line. Press the top of the rocker bar to move up one line. Press the bottom of the rocker bar to move down one line. The rocker bars, in combination with the panning buttons, move to the beginning or end of the line on which the cursor is positioned. Press a panning button and the top of a rocker bar to move to the start of the line. Press a panning button and the bottom of a rocker bar to move to the end of the line.

Selector Buttons

When used by themselves, the concave-shaped selector buttons control Auto Advance. When pressed in combination with other controls, the selector buttons perform multiple functions.

Panning Rockers (Focus 80 Blue only)

The four panning rockers on the Focus 80 Blue function as extra panning buttons. However, they move in the same way as the rocker bars. Press up on either of the panning rockers to pan left and press down to pan right.

Cursor Router Buttons

There are cursor router buttons above each braille cell. Press a cursor router button to move the cursor to that point, or to select a link in a web page or email message. In Line mode, press a cursor router button to open a menu or choose menu commands.

Multi-Control Functions

+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Function                          | Control                                                                        |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Enable Auto Advance Mode          | LEFT SELECT+RIGHT SELECT                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Decrease Auto Advance Speed       | LEFT SELECT                                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Increase Auto Advance Speed       | RIGHT SELECT                                                                   |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Right Mouse Click                 | PANNING BUTTON+CURSOR ROUTER BUTTON                                            |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Control+Left Mouse Click          | ROUTING BUTTON+CHORD                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Page Down                         | LEFT or RIGHT SELECT+ROCKER DOWN                                               |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Page Up                           | LEFT or RIGHT SELECT+ROCKER UP                                                 |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Top of File                       | LEFT PANNING BUTTON+SELECT BUTTON or                                           |
|                                   |  SELECT BUTTON+PANNING ROCKER UP                                               |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bottom of File                    | RIGHT PANNING BUTTON+SELECT BUTTON or                                          |
|                                   |  SELECT BUTTON+PANNING ROCKER DOWN                                             |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| End                               | PANNING BUTTON+ROCKER BAR DOWN                                                 |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Home                              | PANNING BUTTON+ROCKER BAR UP                                                   |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Next Line                         | ROCKER BAR DOWN                                                                |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Prior Line                        | ROCKER BAR UP                                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pan Left                          | LEFT PANNING BUTTON                                                            |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pan Right                         | RIGHT PANNING BUTTON                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Text                       | LEFT SHIFT+CURSOR ROUTER BUTTON                                                |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Block                      | RIGHT SHIFT+CURSOR ROUTER BUTTON at beginning of block; repeat at end of block |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Toggle NAV Rockers On/Off         | LEFT or RIGHT Mode Button CHORD                                                |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Focus Blue Keyboard

Positioned directly above the cursor router buttons, there are eight keys similar to those on a Perkins-style braille keyboard. The eight braille keys from left to right are: 7, 3, 2, 1, 4, 5, 6, and 8. These keys are used to enter text or perform commands. On the front edge, directly under and in the center of the display is a SPACEBAR. This key is used together with the braille keys when entering commands. Directly below the SPACEBAR on the front of the display are two SHIFT keys which are also used to perform various commands. Refer to the Braille Display Input Commands help topic for more information on performing JAWS and Windows commands using the Focus Blue.

Locking the Perkins-style Keyboard

When using your Focus Blue in front of your computer’s QWERTY keyboard, you can lock the Perkins-style keys on the top of the display to prevent accidentally pressing them and entering unwanted text or commands.

To lock the Focus Blue keyboard, press the Power button to display the status information and then simultaneously press a Cursor Router and the left Mode button. To indicate that the keyboard is locked, DOTS 2-3-4-6-7-8 and DOTS 1-3-5-6-7-8 will be displayed in two cells toward the right end of the display, just before the connection status. Press any other control to return to normal operation. Once locked, pressing DOTS 1 through 8 or the SPACEBAR will no longer send keystrokes through to the computer.

To unlock the keyboard so you can once again enter text or perform commands from the Focus Blue, press the Power button to display the status information and then simultaneously press a Cursor Router and the right Mode button. Press any other control to return to normal operation and you can once again enter text using the Focus Blue keyboard.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Controls for the Classic Focus 40 Blue

The Classic Focus 40 Blue braille display provides two Whiz Wheels, two panning buttons, two rocker bars, two selector buttons, and cursor routing buttons and Navrow buttons above each braille cell.

Whiz Wheels

The Focus Whiz Wheels allow you to move quickly through files, dialog boxes, lists, and menus. In a file, you can move by line, sentence, paragraph, or pan backward and forward. In a dialog box, you can move between the available controls, and even interact with them. In a menu, you can move up and down through the menu commands. For more information, see Whiz Wheels.

Panning Buttons

The Focus panning buttons pan left or right one display width (40 cells) each time they are pressed. Press the panning button on the left front edge of the Focus to pan left; press the panning button on the right front edge of the Focus to pan right. The functions of the panning buttons can be reversed so that pressing the left panning button causes the Focus display to pan right and pressing the right panning button causes it to pan left. Please refer to help for the JAWS Keyboard Manager for details on modifying these and other control assignments.

Rocker Bars

The rocker bars provide movement up or down by line. Press the top of the rocker bar to move up one line. Press the bottom of the rocker bar to move down one line. The rocker bars, in combination with the panning buttons, move to the beginning or end of the line on which the cursor is positioned. Press a panning button and the top of a rocker bar to move to the start of the line. Press a panning button and the bottom of a rocker bar to move to the end of the line.

Selector Buttons

When used by themselves, the selector buttons control Auto Advance. When pressed in combination with other controls, the selector buttons perform multiple functions.

Cursor Routing Buttons

There are cursor routing buttons above each braille cell. Press a cursor routing button to move the cursor to that point, or to select a link in a Web page or e-mail message. In Line mode, press a cursor routing button to open a menu or choose menu commands.

Press and hold the RIGHT SELECT BUTTON while simultaneously pressing a CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON to simulate a right mouse click at that location.

Navrow Buttons

Located immediately behind the cursor routing buttons are the Navrow buttons. The number of Navrow buttons is the same as the number of braille cells on the Focus display. The Navrow buttons have two functions–ten serve as hot keys, providing quick access to functions or settings; and the rest serve as extra panning buttons.

Just behind the Navrow buttons are seven raised marks to aid in quick orientation to both the Navrow and cursor routing buttons. The ten Navrow buttons immediately below the center mark are the hot keys and are numbered, to the left of the center mark, 1 through 5; the five buttons to the right of this mark are numbered, left to right, 6 through 10. The remaining buttons serve the same function as the panning buttons; those to the left pan backward and those to the right pan forward.

  ------------------------------------------------- ---------
  Function                                          Hot Key
  Route Braille Cursor to PC Cursor                 1
  Active Cursor Follows Braille Cursor              2
  Braille Cursor Follows Active Cursor              3
  Top of Window                                     4
  SHIFT+TAB                                         5
  TAB                                               6
  Bottom of Window                                  7
  Toggle Contracted Braille (Grade 2) Translation   8
  Expand Current Word                               9
  Route Braille Cursor to Active Cursor             10
  ------------------------------------------------- ---------

In addition, the two Navrow buttons immediately to the left of the first hot key and the two to the right of the tenth hot key are assigned the following special functions.

  ----------------------------- ---------------------------------------------
  Function                      Navrow
  Enable Auto Advance Mode      Second button to the left of first hot key
  Repeat Last Flash Message     First button to the left of first hot key
  Decrease Auto Advance Speed   First button to the right of tenth hot key
  Increase Auto Advance Speed   Second button to the right of tenth hot key
  ----------------------------- ---------------------------------------------

Multi-Control Functions

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Function                          | Control                                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Enable Auto Advance Mode          | LEFT SELECT+RIGHT SELECT                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Decrease Auto Advance Speed       | LEFT SELECT                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Increase Auto Advance Speed       | RIGHT SELECT                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Left Mouse Click                  | PANNING BUTTON+CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON or                                           |
|                                   |  PANNING ROCKER UP+CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON or                                       |
|                                   |  PANNING ROCKER DOWN+CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON                                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Control+Left Mouse Click          | ROUTING BUTTON+CHORD                                                              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Page Down                         | LEFT or RIGHT SELECT+ROCKER DOWN                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Page Up                           | LEFT or RIGHT SELECT+ROCKER UP                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Top of File                       | LEFT PANNING BUTTON+SELECT BUTTON or                                              |
|                                   |  SELECT BUTTON+PANNING ROCKER UP                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bottom of File                    | RIGHT PANNING BUTTON+SELECT BUTTON or                                             |
|                                   |  SELECT BUTTON+PANNING ROCKER DOWN                                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| End                               | PANNING BUTTON+ROCKER BAR DOWN                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Home                              | PANNING BUTTON+ROCKER BAR UP                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Next Line                         | ROCKER BAR DOWN                                                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Prior Line                        | ROCKER BAR UP                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pan Left                          | LEFT PANNING BUTTON or                                                            |
|                                   |  LEFT PANNING ROCKER UP                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pan Right                         | RIGHT PANNING BUTTON or                                                           |
|                                   |  RIGHT PANNING ROCKER UP                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Text                       | RIGHT SELECT BUTTON +CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON                                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Block                      | SELECT BUTTON+CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON at beginning of block; repeat at end of block |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Toggle Whiz Wheels On/Off         | LEFT or RIGHT WHIZ WHEEL+CHORD                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Controls for Focus 40 and 80

Focus 40 and 80 braille displays provide two Whiz Wheels, two panning buttons, two rocker bars, two selector buttons, two panning rockers (Focus 80 only), and cursor routing buttons and Navrow buttons above each Braille cell.

Whiz Wheels

The Focus Whiz Wheels allow you to move quickly through files, dialog boxes, lists, and menus. In a file, you can move by line, sentence, paragraph, or pan backward and forward. In a dialog box, you can move between the available controls, and even interact with them. In a menu, you can move up and down through the menu commands. For more information, see Whiz Wheels.

Panning Buttons

The Focus panning buttons pan left or right one display width (40 or 80 cells) each time you press them. The two panning buttons are rectangular-shaped, making it easy to activate them with the thumbs when your hands are positioned on the Braille cells for reading. Press the panning button on the left front edge of the Focus to pan left. Press the panning button on the right front edge of the Focus to pan right.

Rocker Bars

The rocker bars provide movement up or down by line. Press the top of the rocker bar to move up one line. Press the bottom of the rocker bar to move down one line. The rocker bars, in combination with the panning buttons, move to the beginning or end of the line on which the cursor is positioned. Press a panning button and the top of a rocker bar to move to the start of the line. Press a panning button and the bottom of a rocker bar to move to the end of the line.

Selector Buttons

When used by themselves, the selector buttons control Auto Advance. When pressed in combination with other controls, the selector buttons perform multiple functions.

Panning Rockers (Focus 80 only)

The two panning rockers on the Focus 80 function as extra panning buttons. However, they move in the same way as the rocker bars. Press up on either of the panning rockers to pan left and press down to pan right.

Braille Keyboard

Between the braille cells and the front of each unit, under a removable plastic cover, there are eight keys similar to those on a Perkins style Braille keyboard. These keys are used to enter commands. Along the front edge of the keyboard are three buttons, LEFT SHIFT, SPACEBAR, and RIGHT SHIFT. These three buttons are used together with the Braille keys when entering commands.

Cursor Routing Buttons

There are cursor routing buttons above each Braille cell. Press a cursor routing button to move the cursor to that point, or to select a link in a Web page or e-mail message. In Line mode, press a cursor routing button to open a menu or choose menu commands.

Press and hold the RIGHT SELECT BUTTON while simultaneously pressing a CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON to simulate a right mouse click at that location.

Navrow Buttons

Located immediately behind the cursor routing buttons are the Navrow buttons. The number of Navrow buttons is the same as the number of Braille cells on the Focus display. The Navrow buttons have two functions - 14 serve as hot keys, providing quick access to functions or settings, and the rest serve as extra panning buttons.

The 14 Navrow buttons immediately below the center mark are the hot keys. They are numbered starting from the left and moving to the center mark as 1 through 7. The seven buttons moving from the right of the center mark are numbered 8 through 14. The table below provides a description of these Navrow buttons.

The remaining Navrow buttons serve the same function as the panning buttons. Those to the left pan backward and those to the right pan forward.
 

  ------------------------------------------------- ---------
  Function                                          Hot Key
  Enable Auto Advance Mode                          1
  Repeat Last Flash Message                         2
  Route Braille Cursor to PC Cursor                 3
  Active Cursor Follows Braille Cursor              4
  Braille Cursor Follows Active Cursor              5
  Top of Window                                     6
  SHIFT+TAB                                         7
  TAB                                               8
  Bottom of Window                                  9
  Toggle Contracted Braille (Grade 2) Translation   10
  Expand Current Word                               11
  Route Braille Cursor to Active Cursor             12
  Decrease Auto Advance Speed                       13
  Increase Auto Advance Speed                       14
  ------------------------------------------------- ---------

Multi-Control Functions

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Function                          | Control                                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Enable Auto Advance Mode          | LEFT SELECT+RIGHT SELECT                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Decrease Auto Advance Speed       | LEFT SELECT                                                                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Increase Auto Advance Speed       | RIGHT SELECT                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Left Mouse Click                  | PANNING BUTTON+CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON                                              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Control+Left Mouse Click          | ROUTING BUTTON+CHORD                                                              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Page Down                         | LEFT or RIGHT SELECT+ROCKER DOWN                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Page Up                           | LEFT or RIGHT SELECT+ROCKER UP                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Top of File                       | LEFT PANNING BUTTON+SELECT BUTTON or                                              |
|                                   |  SELECT BUTTON+PANNING ROCKER UP                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bottom of File                    | RIGHT PANNING BUTTON+SELECT BUTTON or                                             |
|                                   |  SELECT BUTTON+PANNING ROCKER DOWN                                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| End                               | PANNING BUTTON+ROCKER BAR DOWN                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Home                              | PANNING BUTTON+ROCKER BAR UP                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Next Line                         | ROCKER BAR DOWN                                                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Prior Line                        | ROCKER BAR UP                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pan Left                          | LEFT PANNING BUTTON or                                                            |
|                                   |  LEFT PANNING ROCKER UP                                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pan Right                         | RIGHT PANNING BUTTON or                                                           |
|                                   |  RIGHT PANNING ROCKER UP                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Text                       | RIGHT SELECT BUTTON +CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON                                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Block                      | SELECT BUTTON+CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON at beginning of block; repeat at end of block |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Toggle Whiz Wheels On/Off         | LEFT or RIGHT WHIZ WHEEL+CHORD                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Controls for Focus 44, 70, and 84

The Focus 44, 70, and 84 feature two Whiz wheels, two advance bars, and cursor routing keys above each Braille cell. There are also two function keys between the advance bars.

Whiz Wheels

The Focus Whiz wheels are used to quickly move through files, dialogs, lists, and menus. The Whiz Wheels provide the functionality you need where you are at. In a file, move by line, sentence, or paragraph. In a dialog, move between the available controls, and even interact with them. In a menu, move up and down through the menu items.

The Whiz Wheels in Files

In text files and word processing documents, the Whiz Wheels are used to move by line, sentence, or paragraph. The two Whiz wheels, one at either end of the Focus displays, are set independently. Press straight down on a Whiz wheel to toggle it between line, sentence, or paragraph. Roll the Whiz wheel toward you to move down through a file. Roll the Whiz wheel away from you to move up through a file.

The Whiz Wheels in Menus

In menus, roll a Whiz wheel toward you to move down through the menu, and roll it away from you to move up through the menu. Press straight down on a Whiz Wheel to select a menu item.

The Whiz Wheels in Dialogs

In dialogs, roll a Whiz Wheel toward you to move forward through the controls, and roll a Whiz Wheel away from you to move through the controls in reverse order. If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel, what happens depends on what type of control is active.

If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel while a Control that list items is active, such as list views, combo boxes, radio buttons, and tree views, the Whiz Wheels enter List Mode. In this mode, use the Whiz Wheels to scroll through the items. Press straight down on a Whiz Wheel again to exit List Mode.

If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel while a check box or button is active, the check box state is toggled or the button is activated. However, if a series of check boxes are in a control group, List Mode is entered when you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel.

The Whiz Wheels provide this functionality in many areas, Windows Explorer, Outlook, Word tool bars, and even on the Windows Desktop.

Focus Panning

Focus panning is the ability to use the Whiz Wheels® to pan through your documents while moving the PC cursor with the Braille cursor. This panning feature is very useful when reading a long document, such as a book. As you read and pan, the screen begins to scroll so you can continuously read.

To turn on Focus panning, simply press the Whiz Wheels until you hear "Focus Panning." Then roll the wheels to navigate your document. Roll the wheel toward you to move down the page and away from you to move up.

Advance Bars

The Focus advance bars are used to move forward or back through a file or while in line mode. Press the LEFT ADVANCE BAR to move left on a line or back through a document. Press the RIGHT ADVANCE BAR to move right on a line or forward through a document. Press both advance bars at the same time to repeat the last Braille Flash Message that was displayed.

Function Buttons

The two function buttons are located between the Braille cells and the back of each unit. Press RIGHT FUNCTION BUTTON+LEFT FUNCTION BUTTON to start Auto Advance mode. To increase the speed of reading while in Auto Advance mode, press the RIGHT FUNCTION BUTTON. To decrease the reading speed, press the LEFT FUNCTION BUTTON.

Braille Keyboard

Between the Braille cells and the front of each unit, there are eight keys similar to those on a Perkins style Braille keyboard. These keys are used to enter commands. Along the front edge of the display are three buttons, LEFT SHIFT, SPACEBAR, and RIGHT SHIFT. These three buttons are used together with the Braille keys when entering commands.

Cursor Routing Keys

The Focus displays provide cursor routing keys above each Braille cell. Press a cursor routing key to move the cursor to that point, or to select a link in a Web page or e-mail message. In Line mode, press a cursor routing key to open a menu or choose menu commands.

Press the RIGHT FUNCTION BUTTON with a cursor routing key to simulate a right mouse click at that location.

Multi-Control Functions

The following is a list of commands that you can perform using the controls on the Focus 40/80.

  ----------------------------- --------------------------------------
  Function                      Controls
  Enable Auto Advance Mode      LEFT FUNCTION+RIGHT FUNCTION
  Decrease Auto Advance Speed   LEFT FUNCTION
  Increase Auto Advance Speed   RIGHT FUNCTION
  Left Mouse Click              CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON
  Control+Left Mouse Click      ROUTING BUTTON+CHORD
  Right Mouse Click             RIGHT FUNCTION+CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON
  Toggle Whiz Wheels On/Off     LEFT or RIGHT WHIZ WHEEL+CHORD
  Pan Left                      LEFT ADVANCE BAR
  Pan Right                     RIGHT ADVANCE BAR
  Repeat Last Flash Message     LEFT ADVANCE BAR+RIGHT ADVANCE BAR
  ----------------------------- --------------------------------------

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Display Input Commands

JAWS supports a series of keystrokes that allow you to input braille commands and also control your computer. Use these keystrokes with Freedom Scientific's Focus braille displays. For other braille displays, contact the manufacturer for a list of keystrokes.

Modifier Keys

Use the modifier keys to simulate key combinations (keystrokes) that include CTRL, ALT, WINDOWS Key, SHIFT, or the JAWS Key (INSERT). To use these modifiers when typing a keystroke, do the following:

1.    Hold down DOT 8 CHORD and then press the corresponding modifier keys in the keystroke. Modifier keystrokes are listed in the following table.

2.    After you create the modifier portion of the keystroke, release the keys and press the remaining part of the keystroke. For example, to perform the keystroke CTRL+SHIFT+V, you press DOTS 3-7-8 CHORD, release the keys, and then press V (DOTS 1-2-3-6).

Modifier Keys

+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Key Name                                                  | Keystroke                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Function Keys (F1 through F12)                            | DOT 1                             |
|  For more information, see the Function Keys description. |                                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| INSERT                                                    | DOT 2                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| CTRL                                                      | DOT 3                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| WINDOWS Key                                               | DOT 4                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| JAWS Key                                                  | DOT 5                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ALT                                                       | DOT 6                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| SHIFT                                                     | DOT 7                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

Function Keys

To simulate the function keys (F1 through F12), press DOTS 1-8 CHORD followed by A through L (which correspond to 1 through 12). For example, to simulate the F6 key, press DOTS 1-8 CHORD, then F (DOTS 1-2-4). If the function key is part of a key combination, add the appropriate modifiers while holding down DOTS 1-8 CHORD. For example, to simulate the keystroke INSERT+F2, press DOTS 1-2-8 CHORD, then B (DOTS 1-2).

Special Keys

Use these keystrokes to simulate certain keys that are not available on the Focus braille keyboard. These keys can be combined with the modifier keys described previously. Punctuation and other symbols will be entered using their contracted braille equivalents if Contracted Braille Translation is set to Input and Output. For your convenience, both keystrokes and braille dot patterns are provided. If no dot pattern equivalent is available, a dash appears in the table cell.

 

Special Keys

+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| Key Name              | Keystroke                                                                       | DOTS Pattern                            |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ESC                   | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 1 or Z CHORD                                                    | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 1 or DOTS 1-3-5-6 CHORD |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ALT                   | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 2                                                               | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| APPLICATION Key       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 2 CHORD                                                         | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| NUM PAD ASTERISK      | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 3                                                               | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| WINDOWS Key           | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 4                                                               | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
|                       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 7                                                               | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 7                       |
|                       |                                                                                 |                                         |
| NUM PAD SLASH         |                                                                                 |                                         |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| CAPS LOCK             | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 7 CHORD                                                         | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 7 CHORD                 |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| NUM PAD PLUS          | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 8                                                               | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| BACKSPACE             | DOT 7                                                                           | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| ENTER                 | DOT 8                                                                           | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| CTRL+BACKSPACE        | DOTS 1-2-3-4-5-6-7 CHORD                                                        | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| TAB                   | DOTS 4-5 CHORD                                                                  | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| SHIFT+TAB             | B CHORD                                                                         | DOTS 1-2 CHORD                          |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| HOME                  | K CHORD                                                                         | DOTS 1-3 CHORD                          |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| END                   | DOTS 4-6 CHORD                                                                  | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| PAGE UP               | LEFT SELECT+ROCKER BAR UP or RIGHT SELECT+ROCKER BAR UP or DOTS 2-3-7 CHORD     | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| PAGE DOWN             | LEFT SELECT+ROCKER BAR DOWN or RIGHT SELECT+ROCKER BAR DOWN or DOTS 5-6-7 CHORD | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| DELETE                | FOR CHORD                                                                       | DOTS 1-2-3-4-5-6 CHORD                  |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| EQUALS                | DOTS 1-2-3-4-5-6                                                                | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| RIGHT BRACKET         | DOTS 1-2-4-5-6-7                                                                | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| LEFT BRACKET          | DOTS 2-4-6-7                                                                    | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| BACKSLASH             | DOTS 1-2-5-6-7                                                                  | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| SLASH                 | DOTS 3-4                                                                        | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| LEFT PARENTHESIS      | DOTS 1-2-3-5-6                                                                  | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| RIGHT PARENTHESIS     | DOTS 2-3-4-5-6                                                                  | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| APOSTROPHE            | DOT 3                                                                           | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| DASH                  | DOTS 3-6                                                                        | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| GRÀVE                 | DOT 4                                                                           | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| PERIOD                | DOTS 4-6                                                                        | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| QUESTION MARK         | DOTS 1-4-5-6                                                                    | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| EXCLAMATION MARK      | DOTS 2-3-4-6                                                                    | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| SEMICOLON             | DOTS 5-6                                                                        | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+
| COMMA                 | DOT 6                                                                           | -                                       |
+-----------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-----------------------------------------+

 

Navigation Commands

Use these keystrokes to perform various JAWS navigation commands. Both keystrokes and braille dot patterns are provided in the table. If no dot pattern equivalent is available, a dash appears in the table cell.

 

Navigation Commands

+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Description                      | Keystroke                                  | DOTS Pattern                    |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Prior Character              | DOT 3 CHORD                                | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Next Character               | DOT 6 CHORD                                | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Character                    | DOTS 3-6 CHORD                             | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Prior Word                   | DOT 2 CHORD                                | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Next Word                    | DOT 5 CHORD                                | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Word                         | DOTS 2-5 CHORD                             | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Prior Line                   | DOT 1 CHORD or LEFT ROCKER BAR UP          | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Next Line                    | DOT 4 CHORD or LEFT ROCKER BAR DOWN        | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Line                         | C CHORD                                    | DOTS 1-4 CHORD                  |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Prior Sentence               | LEFT SHIFT+RIGHT ROCKER BAR UP             | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Next Sentence                | LEFT SHIFT+RIGHT ROCKER BAR DOWN           | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Sentence                     | LEFT SHIFT+RIGHT SHIFT+C                   | LEFT SHIFT+RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-4 |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Prior Paragraph              | RIGHT SHIFT+LEFT ROCKER BAR UP             | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Next Paragraph               | RIGHT SHIFT+LEFT ROCKER BAR DOWN           | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Paragraph                    | LEFT SHIFT+RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5-6-7-8    | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Move to Top of File              | L CHORD                                    | DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD                |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Move to Bottom of File           | DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD                           | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say to Cursor                    | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-7                       | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say from Cursor                  | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 6-8                       | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say All                          | DOTS 1-2-4-5-6 CHORD                       | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Top Line of Active Window    | LEFT ROCKER BAR UP+RIGHT ROCKER BAR UP     | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Bottom Line of Active Window | LEFT ROCKER BAR DOWN+RIGHT ROCKER BAR DOWN | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Previous Document Window         | DOTS 2-3 CHORD                             | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Next Document Window             | DOTS 5-6 CHORD                             | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Open List Box                    | LEFT SHIFT+RIGHT ROCKER BAR DOWN           | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Close List Box                   | LEFT SHIFT+RIGHT ROCKER BAR UP             | -                               |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Exit Forms Mode                  | X CHORD                                    | DOTS 1-3-4-6 CHORD              |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Say Window Prompt and Text       | G CHORD                                    | DOTS 1-2-4-5 CHORD              |
+----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+---------------------------------+

 

Microsoft Word Navigation Quick Keys

Use these keystrokes to navigate Microsoft Word documents. Navigation Quick Keys must be enabled in order for these commands to function (DOTS 2-8 CHORD followed by DOTS 1-3-5-6). Note that you can add DOT 7 to most of the keystrokes in the table below to move to the previous element of that type in the document. Both keystrokes and braille dot patterns are provided in the table. If no dot pattern equivalent is available, a dash appears in the table cell.

 

Microsoft Word Navigation Quick Keys

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Description           | Keystroke             | DOTS Pattern          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Bookmark         | B                     | DOTS 1-2              |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Comment          | C                     | DOTS 1-4              |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Endnote          | E                     | DOTS 1-5              |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Form Field       | F                     | DOTS 1-2-4            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Graphic          | G                     | DOTS 1-2-4-5          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Heading          | H                     | DOTS 1-2-5            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Footnote         | O                     | DOTS 1-3-5            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Paragraph        | P                     | DOTS 1-2-3-4          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Previous Paragraph    | P+DOT 7               | DOTS 1-2-3-4-7        |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Section          | S                     | DOTS 2-3-4            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Table            | T                     | DOTS 2-3-4-5          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Next Page             | SPACEBAR              | -                     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Previous Page         | BACKSPACE             | DOT 7                 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

 

Text Selection Commands

Use these keystrokes to perform various text selection commands. Both keystrokes and braille dot patterns are provided in the table. If no dot pattern equivalent is available, a dash appears in the table cell.

 

Text Selection Commands

+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Description               | Keystroke                      | DOTS Pattern          |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select Prior Character    | DOTS 3-7 CHORD                 | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select Next Character     | DOTS 6-7 CHORD                 | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select Prior Word         | DOTS 2-7 CHORD                 | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select Next Word          | DOTS 5-7 CHORD                 | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select Prior Line         | DOTS 1-7 CHORD                 | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select Next Line          | DOTS 4-7 CHORD                 | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select Prior Screen       | LEFT SHIFT+K                   | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3   |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select Next Screen        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6            | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select from Start of Line | K+DOT 7 CHORD                  | DOTS 1-3-7 CHORD      |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select to End of Line     | DOTS 4-6-7 CHORD               | --                    |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select from Top           | L+DOT 7 CHORD                  | DOTS 1-2-3-7 CHORD    |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Select to Bottom          | DOTS 4-5-6-7 CHORD             | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Move To Beginning Of Line | ROCKER BAR UP+PANNING BUTTON   | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Move To End Of Line       | ROCKER BAR DOWN+PANNING BUTTON | -                     |
+---------------------------+--------------------------------+-----------------------+

 

Braille Commands

Use these keystrokes to configure various braille functions. Both keystrokes and braille dot patterns are provided in the table.

 

Braille Commands

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Description                       | Keystroke             | DOTS Pattern          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Top of Document                   | L CHORD               | DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Bottom of Document                | DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD      | DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Grade 2 Expand Current Word       | T CHORD               | DOTS 2-3-4-5 CHORD    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Grade 2 Translation               | DOTS 1-2-4-5-7 CHORD  | DOTS 1-2-4-5-7 CHORD  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Toggle Characters and Attributes  | CH Sign CHORD         | DOTS 1-6 CHORD        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Cycle Among Braille Display Modes | M CHORD               | DOTS 1-3-4 CHORD      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Toggle 8/6 DOTS Braille           | 8 CHORD               | DOTS 2-3-6 CHORD      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Change Cursor Shape               | SH Sign CHORD         | DOTS 1-4-6 CHORD      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Restrict Braille Cursor           | R CHORD               | DOTS 1-2-3-5 CHORD    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Switch Braille Translation Table  | DOTS 2-3-4-5-7 CHORD  | DOTS 2-3-4-5-7 CHORD  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

 

Windows Commands

Use these keystrokes for basic editing functions in Windows.

 

Windows Commands

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------+
| Description           | Braille Sign          | DOTS Pattern            |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------+
| ALT+TAB               | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-5   | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-5     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------+
| Paste from Clipboard  | LEFT SHIFT+V          | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-6 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------+
| Copy to Clipboard     | LEFT SHIFT+C          | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-4     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------+
| Cut to Clipboard      | LEFT SHIFT+X          | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-4-6 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------+
| Undo                  | LEFT SHIFT+Z          | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-5-6 |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------+
| Delete                | LEFT SHIFT+D          | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-4-5   |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-------------------------+

 

Selection Commands

Use these keystrokes to select characters, lines, and other page elements.

 

Selection Commands

+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Description               | Braille Sign          | DOTS Pattern                |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select Next Character     | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 6      | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 6            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select Prior Character    | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 3      | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 3            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select Next Line          | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 4      | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 4            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select Prior Line         | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 1      | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 1            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select to End of Line     | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 5      | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 5            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select from Start of Line | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 2      | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 2            |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select from Top           | LEFT SHIFT+L          | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select to Bottom          | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-5-6 | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-5-6       |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select Next Screen        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6   | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6         |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select Prior Screen       | LEFT SHIFT+K          | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3         |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select All                | LEFT SHIFT+FOR Sign   | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-4-5-6 |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select a Frame            | RIGHT SHIFT+9         | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-5        |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select a Heading          | RIGHT SHIFT+6         | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5      |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+
| Select a Link             | RIGHT SHIFT+7         | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5-6    |
+---------------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------------+

 

JAWS Commands

Use these keystrokes to perform some of the more common JAWS functions.

 

JAWS Commands

+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Description              | Braille Sign               | DOTS Pattern             |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| JAWS Window              | RIGHT SHIFT+J              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4-5   |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Quick Settings           | RIGHT SHIFT+V              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-6 |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Open Task List           | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-5-6     | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-5-6   |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| List System Tray Icons   | RIGHT SHIFT+K              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3     |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Say System Time          | RIGHT SHIFT DOTS 1-2-3     | RIGHT SHIFT DOTS 1-2-3   |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Drag and Drop            | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-7 CHORD | -                        |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Refresh Screen           | RIGHT SHIFT+Z              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-5-6 |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Say Font                 | RIGHT SHIFT+F              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4   |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Windows Keys Help        | RIGHT SHIFT+W              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4-5-6 |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Read Current Window      | RIGHT SHIFT+B              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2     |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Default Button in Dialog | RIGHT SHIFT+E              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-5     |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Shut DOWN JAWS           | RIGHT SHIFT+4              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-5-6   |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Select a Voice Profile   | RIGHT SHIFT+S              | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-4   |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Silence Speech           | LEFT or RIGHT SHIFT        | -                        |
+--------------------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+

 

Cursor Functions

Use these keystrokes to select a cursor for navigating JAWS.

 

Cursor Functions

+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| Description                           | Braille Sign                      | DOTS Pattern           |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| JAWS Cursor                           | J CHORD                           | DOTS 2-4-5 CHORD       |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| PC Cursor                             | P CHORD                           | DOTS 1-2-3-4 CHORD     |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| Touch Cursor                          | DOTS 1-2-5-6 CHORD                | DOTS 1-2-5-6 CHORD     |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| Route JAWS to PC                      | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-6 (MINUS Sign) | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-6   |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| Route PC to JAWS                      | RIGHT SHIFT+ING Sign (PLUS Sign)  | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-4-6 |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| Braille Follows Active                | DOTS 1-2-6 CHORD                  | DOTS 1-2-6 CHORD       |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| Active Follows Braille                | DOTS 1-2-7 CHORD                  | DOTS 1-2-7 CHORD       |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| Route Braille Cursor to PC Cursor     | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 3-4-6             | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 3-4-6  |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+
| Route Braille Cursor to Active Cursor | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 3-6               | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 3-6    |
+---------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+------------------------+

 

Touch Cursor Functions

Use these keystrokes to navigate using the Touch Cursor.

 

Cursor Functions

+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Description                                              | Braille Sign                                                                                                                  | DOTS Pattern                                                                                                                  |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Touch Cursor                                             | DOTS 1-2-5-6 CHORD                                                                                                            | DOTS 1-2-5-6 CHORD                                                                                                            |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Prior Object                                             | DOTS 1-2 CHORD                                                                                                                | DOTS 1-2 CHORD                                                                                                                |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Next Object                                              | DOTS 4-5 CHORD                                                                                                                | DOTS 4-5 CHORD                                                                                                                |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Current Object                                       | C CHORD                                                                                                                       | DOTS 1-4 CHORD                                                                                                                |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Next Object by Type (specified in the navigation rotor)  | LEFT or RIGHT ROCKER DOWN                                                                                                     | LEFT or RIGHT ROCKER DOWN                                                                                                     |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Prior Object by Type (specified in the navigation rotor) | LEFT or RIGHT ROCKER UP                                                                                                       | LEFT or RIGHT ROCKER UP                                                                                                       |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Move Forward Through Navigation Types                    | LEFT SELECT+LEFT ROCKER DOWN, RIGHT SELECT+LEFT ROCKER DOWN, LEFT SELECT+RIGHT ROCKER DOWN, or RIGHT SELECT+RIGHT ROCKER DOWN | LEFT SELECT+LEFT ROCKER DOWN, RIGHT SELECT+LEFT ROCKER DOWN, LEFT SELECT+RIGHT ROCKER DOWN, or RIGHT SELECT+RIGHT ROCKER DOWN |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Move Backward Through Navigation Types                   | LEFT SELECT+LEFT ROCKER UP, RIGHT SELECT+LEFT ROCKER UP, LEFT SELECT+RIGHT ROCKER UP, or RIGHT SELECT+RIGHT ROCKER UP         | LEFT SELECT+LEFT ROCKER UP, RIGHT SELECT+LEFT ROCKER UP, LEFT SELECT+RIGHT ROCKER UP, or RIGHT SELECT+RIGHT ROCKER UP         |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Move to First Object                                     | LEFT PANNING+LEFT or RIGHT SELECT or L CHORD                                                                                  | LEFT PANNING+LEFT or RIGHT SELECT or DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD                                                                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Move to Last Object                                      | RIGHT PANNING+LEFT or RIGHT SELECT or DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD                                                                        | LEFT PANNING+LEFT or RIGHT SELECT or DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD                                                                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Activate Current Object                                  | CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON                                                                                                         | CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON                                                                                                         |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Activate Text Review Mode                                | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 7                                                                                                             | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 7                                                                                                             |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Turn Off Text Review Mode                                | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 1 or X CHORD                                                                                                  | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 1 or DOTS 1-3-4-6 CHORD                                                                                       |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Toggle Advanced Navigation                               | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 3 or press and hold a cursor routing button                                                                   | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 3 or press and hold a cursor routing button                                                                   |
+----------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Utility Functions

Use these keystrokes for general utility functions.

 

Utility Functions

+------------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Description            | Braille Sign          | DOTS Pattern                 |
+------------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Run JAWS Manager       | RIGHT SHIFT+2         | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3         |
+------------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Set Frame Top LEFT     | RIGHT SHIFT+OW Sign   | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4-6       |
+------------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Set Frame Bottom RIGHT | RIGHT SHIFT+ER Sign   | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4-5-6   |
+------------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Graphics Labeler       | RIGHT SHIFT+G         | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4-5     |
+------------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| JAWS Find              | RIGHT SHIFT+F CHORD   | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4 CHORD |
+------------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| JAWS Find Next         | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-5  | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-5         |
+------------------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Focus Braille Commands

These commands all use the Focus SPACEBAR. We use the term Chord to indicate this. A Chord is just a key sequence pressed together with the SPACEBAR.

Note: For your convenience, we have provided both the Braille signs for each command and the dot pattern equivalents. Just navigate to the column heading of the notation method you prefer, and press ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW to move through the listing of commands. You will hear only the command description and the Braille sign or dot pattern, not both. If there is no Braille sign corresponding to the dot patterns, the dot patterns are listed in both columns.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------- -----------------------
  Description                                                         Braille Sign           Braille Dot Positions
  Braille Top of Window                                               L CHORD                DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD
  Braille Bottom of Window                                            DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD       DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD
  Grade 2 Expand Current Word                                         T CHORD                DOTS 2-3-4-5 CHORD
  Grade 2 Translation                                                 DOTS 1-2-4-5-7 CHORD   DOTS 1-2-4-5-7 CHORD
  Toggle Characters and Attributes                                    CH Sign CHORD          DOTS 1-6 CHORD
  Cycle Among Line, Structured, Attributes, and Speech Output Modes   M CHORD                DOTS 1-3-4 CHORD
  Toggle 8/6 Dot Braille                                              8 CHORD                DOTS 2-3-6 CHORD
  Change Cursor Shape                                                 SH Sign CHORD          DOTS 1-4-6 CHORD
  Restrict Braille Cursor                                             R CHORD                DOTS 1-2-3-5 CHORD
  ------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------- -----------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Windows Commands

All Windows commands use the LEFT SHIFT key as part of the command.

Note: For your convenience, we have provided both the Braille signs for each command and the dot pattern equivalents. Just navigate to the column heading of the notation method you prefer, and press ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW to move through the listing of commands. You will hear only the command description and the Braille sign or dot pattern, not both. If there is no Braille sign corresponding to the dot patterns, the dot patterns are listed in both columns.

Navigation and Editing Commands

  ---------------------- --------------------- -------------------------
  Description            Braille Sign          Braille Dot Patterns
  ALT+TAB                LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-5   LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-5
  Paste from Clipboard   LEFT SHIFT+V          LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-6
  Copy to Clipboard      LEFT SHIFT+C          LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-4
  Cut to Clipboard       LEFT SHIFT+X          LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-4-6
  Undo                   LEFT SHIFT+Z          LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-5-6
  Delete                 LEFT SHIFT+D          LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-4-5
  ---------------------- --------------------- -------------------------

Selection Commands

  --------------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------------
  Description                 Braille Sign            Braille Dot Patterns
  Select Next Character       LEFT SHIFT+DOT 6        LEFT SHIFT+DOT 6
  Select Prior Character      LEFT SHIFT+DOT 3        LEFT SHIFT+DOT 3
  Select Next Line            LEFT SHIFT+DOT 4        LEFT SHIFT+DOT 4
  Select Prior Line           LEFT SHIFT+DOT 1        LEFT SHIFT+DOT 1
  Select to End of Line       LEFT SHIFT+DOT 5        LEFT SHIFT+DOT 5
  Select from Start of Line   LEFT SHIFT+DOT 2        LEFT SHIFT+DOT 2
  Select from Top             LEFT SHIFT+L            LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3
  Select to Bottom            LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-5-6   LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-5-6
  Select Next Screen          LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6     LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6
  Select Prior Screen         LEFT SHIFT+K            LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3
  Select All                  LEFT SHIFT+FOR Sign     LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-4-5-6
  Select a Frame              RIGHT SHIFT+9           RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-5
  Select a Heading            RIGHT SHIFT+6           RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5
  Select a Link               RIGHT SHIFT+7           RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5-6
  --------------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------------

Selecting with the Cursor Routing Keys

To select with the cursor routing keys, press and hold down LEFT SHIFT, then press the cursor routing key above the text where you wish to begin the selection. Release both keys. Move to where you wish to end the selection, and press LEFT SHIFT plus the cursor routing key at that location. Use any navigation commands to move from the begin point to the end point of the text you are selecting, even the Whiz wheels, but if the window containing the text scrolls, this affects what information is selected.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Focus JAWS Commands

All JAWS commands use the RIGHT SHIFT key as part of the command.

Note: For your convenience, we have provided both the Braille signs for each command and the dot pattern equivalents. Just navigate to the column heading of the notation method you prefer, and press ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW to move through the listing of commands. You will hear only the command description and the Braille sign or dot pattern, not both. If there is no Braille sign corresponding to the dot patterns, the dot patterns are listed in both columns. Use computer Braille for numbers noted in the Braille Sign column.

General Commands

  -------------------------- --------------- --------------------------
  Description                Braille Sign    Braille Dot Patterns
  JAWS Window                RIGHT SHIFT+J   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4-5
  Quick Settings             RIGHT SHIFT+V   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-6
  Open Window List           RIGHT SHIFT+0   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-5-6
  List System Tray Icons     RIGHT SHIFT+K   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3
  Refresh Screen             RIGHT SHIFT+Z   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-5-6
  Say Font                   RIGHT SHIFT+F   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4
  Window Keys Help           RIGHT SHIFT+W   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4-5-6
  Read Current Window        RIGHT SHIFT+B   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2
  Default Button in Dialog   RIGHT SHIFT+E   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-5
  Shut Down JAWS             RIGHT SHIFT+4   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-5-6
  Select a Voice Profile     RIGHT SHIFT+S   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-4
  Toggle Table Headers       RIGHT SHIFT+H   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-5
  Toggle Table Reading       RIGHT SHIFT+Q   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-4-5
  -------------------------- --------------- --------------------------

Cursor Commands

  ------------------ ----------------------------------- ------------------------
  Description        Braille Sign                        Braille Dot Patterns
  Route JAWS to PC   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-6 (MINUS Sign)   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-6
  Route PC To JAWS   RIGHT SHIFT+ING (PLUS Sign)         RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-4-6
  ------------------ ----------------------------------- ------------------------

Utilities

  ------------------------ ---------------------- ------------------------------
  Description              Braille Sign           Braille Dot Patterns
  Run JAWS Manager         RIGHT SHIFT+2          RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3
  Set Frame Top Left       RIGHT SHIFT+OW Sign    RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4-6
  Set Frame Bottom Right   RIGHT SHIFT+ER Sign    RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4-5-6
  Graphics Labeler         RIGHT SHIFT+G          RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4-5
  JAWS Find                RIGHT SHIFT+F CHORD    RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4 CHORD
  JAWS Find Next           RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-5   RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-5
  ------------------------ ---------------------- ------------------------------

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Focus Application Specific Commands

The Focus Braille displays provide easy access to many popular applications, using easy to learn commands that correspond to each application's keyboard commands and to JAWS specific commands for each application.

Web Pages

Microsoft Word

Microsoft Excel

Microsoft Powerpoint

Microsoft FrontPage

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Focus Bluetooth Connection

In order to use the Focus Blue with JAWS wirelessly over Bluetooth, you must first configure a Bluetooth partnership between the Focus and computer.

To set up a Bluetooth partnership between the Focus display and computer, do the following:

1.    Make sure that Bluetooth is enabled on the computer running JAWS. If you are using an external USB Bluetooth adapter, insert it and ensure it is detected properly.

2.    Power on the focus. The firmware version and battery status information is displayed.

3.    On the computer, go to the Control Panel and type "bluetooth" into the Search edit box.

4.    Press TAB to move to Add Bluetooth Device and press ENTER. The computer will begin searching for Bluetooth devices. This may take several seconds. You are placed in the list of devices when the search is complete.

5.    Use the ARROW keys to select your Focus display from the list, for example, Focus 40 BT, and then choose Next. If the Focus display was not found, make sure it is turned on then select the Retry button.

6.    Select the Pairing Code button, type 0000 into the edit field, then choose Next.

7.    After a few seconds, you will receive a message informing you that the Bluetooth device was successfully connected. Choose the Close button.

You must now configure JAWS to use the Bluetooth connection. Note that it is not necessary to first establish a USB connection before using Bluetooth. If you have not yet set up a USB connection with the Focus display, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to open the JAWS window.

2.    Press ALT+O to open the Options menu and select Braille to open the Braille Basic Settings dialog box.

3.    Press TAB to move to the Add Braille Display button and press ENTER.

4.    In the list of braille displays, choose Focus and press the SPACEBAR to select it, then choose Next.

5.    In the Select the output port edit combo box, choose Bluetooth.

6.    Choose next and make sure that the Focus is selected as the primary display.

7.    Select Finish and you are instructed to restart JAWS in order for these changes to take effect. Select OK to close this message and once more to close the Braille Basic Settings dialog box.

8.    Quit and restart JAWS and your Focus Blue is now communicating with JAWS over Bluetooth.

If you are currently using the Focus display over USB and you want to switch the connection to use Bluetooth, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to open the JAWS window.

2.    Press ALT+O to open the Options menu and select Braille to open the Braille Basic Settings dialog box.

3.    In the Default Braille Display combo box, make sure Focus is selected then choose Modify Settings.

4.    In the Select the output port edit combo box, choose Bluetooth.

5.    Select OK and you are instructed to restart JAWS in order for these changes to take effect. Select OK to close this message and once more to close the Braille Basic Settings dialog box.

6.    Quit and restart JAWS and your Focus Blue is now communicating with JAWS over Bluetooth.

Once JAWS is configured to communicate with the Focus Blue over Bluetooth, you can switch back and forth between USB and Bluetooth and JAWS will automatically detect the connection without the need to change any settings or restart JAWS. For example, if you connect the USB cable, the display will work with JAWS over USB. If you disconnect the USB cable, then power on the Focus Blue, the display will work with JAWS over Bluetooth.

To check the battery status, press the power button to display the percentage of battery power remaining. The letters “BT” are also displayed near the right end of the display to indicate the Bluetooth connection is active. Press a cursor routing button to return to normal operation.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Lite M20

The versatile Braille Lite M20, 20-cell display, is ideal for use with JAWS. Compact, it has two great advantages over other Braille displays. First, it can do double duty, acting both as a personal notetaking product and as a Braille display. It's almost like having two computers at your fingertips. Second, the Braille Lite M20 has a Braille keyboard. This makes it easy to remember and execute a large set of commands.

Whiz Wheels

The Whiz wheels are used to quickly move through files, dialogs, lists, and menus. The Whiz Wheels provide the functionality you need where you are working. In a file, move by line, sentence, or paragraph. In a dialog, move between the available controls, and even interact with them. In a menu, move up and down through the menu items.

The Whiz Wheels in Files

In text files and word processing documents, the Whiz Wheels are used to move by line, sentence, or paragraph. The two Whiz wheels, one at either end of the notetaker, are set independently. Press straight down on a Whiz wheel to toggle it between line, sentence, or paragraph. Roll the Whiz wheel toward you to move down through a file. Roll the Whiz wheel away from you to move up through a file.

The Whiz Wheels in Menus

In menus, roll a Whiz wheel toward you to move down through the menu, and roll it away from you to move up through the menu. Press straight down on a Whiz Wheel to select a menu item.

The Whiz Wheels in Dialogs

In dialogs, roll a Whiz Wheel toward you to move forward through the controls, and roll a Whiz Wheel away from you to move through the controls in reverse order. If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel, what happens depends on what type of control is active.

If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel while a Control that list items is active, such as list views, combo boxes, radio buttons, and tree views, the Whiz Wheels enter List Mode. In this mode, use the Whiz Wheels to scroll through the items. Press straight down on a Whiz Wheel again to exit List Mode.

If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel while a check box or button is active, the check box state is toggled or the button is activated. However, if a series of check boxes are in a control group, List Mode is entered when you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel.

The Whiz Wheels provide this functionality in many areas, Windows Explorer, Outlook, Word tool bars, and even on the Windows Desktop.

Braille Lite M20 Commands

Windows Commands

Navigating Text

Editing and Selecting Commands

Selecting with the Cursor Routing Keys

Cursor Commands

Braille Commands

JAWS Commands

Windows Commands

  --------------------------- --------------------
  Description                 Command
  TAB                         DOTS 4-5
  SHIFT+TAB                   DOTS 1-2
  Start Menu                  DOTS 3-4 (ST sign)
  Minimize All Applications   DOTS 1-4-5 (D)
  Activate Menu Bar           DOTS 3-5
  ALT+TAB                     DOTS 4-5-7
  ENTER                       DOT 8
  BACKSPACE                   DOT 7
  Delete                      DOTS 1-4-5-7 CHORD
  ESC                         DOTS 1-3-5-6 (Z)
  Next Document Window        DOTS 2-4-5-6
  --------------------------- --------------------

Navigating Text

  ----------------------------- --------------------------
  Description                   Command
  Auto Advance Mode             DOTS 7-8
  Increase Auto Advance Speed   DOT 4 CHORD
  Decrease Auto Advance Speed   DOT 1 CHORD
  Pan Right                     Right End of Advance Bar
  Pan Left                      Left End of Advance Bar
  Prior Line                    DOT 1
  Next Line                     DOT 4
  Move to Beginning of Line     DOT 2
  Move to End of Line           DOT 5
  Move Left                     DOT 3
  Move Right                    DOT 6
  Page Down                     DOTS 4-6
  Page Up                       DOTS 1-3
  Braille Top                   DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD
  Braille Bottom                DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD
  Top of File                   DOTS 1-2-3
  Bottom of File                DOTS 4-5-6
  ----------------------------- --------------------------

Editing and Selecting Commands

  ----------------------------- ------------------
  Description                   Command
  Cut                           DOTS 1-3-4-6 (X)
  Copy                          DOTS 1-4 (C)
  Paste                         DOTS 1-2-3-6 (V)
  Undo                          DOTS 1-3-6 (U)
  Select Next Line              DOTS 4-7
  Select Previous Line          DOTS 1-7
  Select Next Character         DOTS 6-7
  Select Previous Character     DOTS 3-7
  Select from Top               DOTS 1-2-3-7
  Select to Bottom              DOTS 4-5-6-7
  Select to Beginning of Line   DOTS 2-7
  Select to End of Line         DOTS 5-7
  Select Prior Screen           DOTS 1-3-7
  Select Next Screen            DOTS 4-6-7
  Select All                    DOTS 2-3-4-7
  ----------------------------- ------------------

Selecting with the Cursor Routing Keys

To select with the cursor routing keys, press and hold down DOT 7, then press the cursor routing key above the text where you wish to begin the selection. Release both keys. Move to where you wish to end the selection, and press DOT 7 plus the cursor routing key at that location. Use any navigation commands to move from the begin point to the end point of the text you are selecting, even the Whiz wheels, but if the window containing the text scrolls, this affects what information is selected.

Cursor Commands

  -------------------------------- ------------------
  Description                      Command
  PC Cursor                        DOTS 1-2-3-4 (P)
  Route PC to JAWS                 DOTS 3-4-6-8
  JAWS Cursor                      DOTS 2-4-5 (J)
  Route JAWS to PC                 DOTS 3-6-8
  Route Braille to Active Cursor   DOTS 1-2-3-5 (R)
  Braille Follows Active           DOTS 1-2-4 (F)
  Active Follows Braille           DOTS 2-3-4-5
  Restrict Braille Cursor          DOTS 2-5 CHORD
  Toggle Braille Cursor Shape      DOTS 1-4-6 CHORD
  -------------------------------- ------------------

Braille Commands

  ------------------------------------- ------------------------------------
  Description                           Command
  Grade 2 Translation                   DOTS 1-2-4-5 (G)
  Expand Current Word                   DOTS 1-5 (E)
  Adjust Braille Options                DOTS 1-3-5 CHORD or DOTS 1-2 CHORD
  Toggle 6/8 Dot Mode                   DOTS 2-3-6
  Toggle 8/Unlimited Pixels per Space   DOTS 2-3-6 CHORD
  Toggle Braille Mode                   DOTS 1-3-4
  Toggle Current/Line Mode              DOTS 2-3
  Attribute Marking                     DOTS 1-3-4 CHORD
  Toggle Characters/Attributes          DOTS 1-6 CHORD
  Assign Color Marking                  DOTS 1-4 CHORD
  Repeat Last Flash Message             DOTS 1-2-4 CHORD
  ------------------------------------- ------------------------------------

JAWS Commands

  ------------------------------------ --------------
  Description                          Command
  Context Sensitive Help (INSERT+F1)   DOTS 2-8
  Keyboard Help                        DOTS 1-4-5-6
  JAWS Window                          DOTS 2-4-5-8
  Adjust JAWS Verbosity                DOTS 1-3-5-8
  Window List                          DOTS 3-5-6-8
  System Tray List                     DOTS 1-3-8
  Select a Synthesizer                 DOTS 2-3-4-8
  Say Font                             DOTS 1-2-4-8
  Read Entire Window                   DOTS 1-2-8
  Say Default Button in Dialog         DOTS 1-5-8
  Shut Down JAWS                       DOTS 2-5-8
  Run JAWS Manager                     DOTS 2-3-8
  Graphics Labler                      DOTS 1-2-3-8
  JAWS Find                            DOTS 2-3-5-8
  JAWS Find Next                       DOTS 2-5-8
  Mute Synthesizer                     DOTS 1-4-6
  ------------------------------------ --------------

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Lite M40

The versatile Braille Lite M40, 40-cell display, is ideal for use with JAWS. Compact, it has two great advantages over other Braille displays. First, it can do double duty, acting both as a personal notetaking product and as a Braille display. It's almost like having two computers at your fingertips. Second, the Braille Lite M40 has a Braille keyboard. This makes it easy to remember and execute a large set of commands.

Whiz Wheels

The Whiz wheels are used to quickly move through files, dialogs, lists, and menus. The Whiz Wheels provide the functionality you need while you are working. In a file, move by line, sentence, or paragraph. In a dialog, move between the available controls, and even interact with them. In a menu, move up and down through the menu items.

The Whiz Wheels in Files

In text files and word processing documents, the Whiz Wheels are used to move by line, sentence, or paragraph. The two Whiz wheels, one at either end of the notetaker, are set independently. Press straight down on a Whiz wheel to toggle it between line, sentence, or paragraph. Roll the Whiz wheel toward you to move down through a file. Roll the Whiz wheel away from you to move up through a file.

The Whiz Wheels in Menus

In menus, roll a Whiz wheel toward you to move down through the menu, and roll it away from you to move up through the menu. Press straight down on a Whiz Wheel to select a menu item.

The Whiz Wheels in Dialogs

In dialogs, roll a Whiz Wheel toward you to move forward through the controls, and roll a Whiz Wheel away from you to move through the controls in reverse order. If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel, what happens depends on what type of control is active.

If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel while a Control that list items is active, such as list views, combo boxes, radio buttons, and tree views, the Whiz Wheels enter List Mode. In this mode, use the Whiz Wheels to scroll through the items. Press straight down on a Whiz Wheel again to exit List Mode.

If you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel while a check box or button is active, the check box state is toggled or the button is activated. However, if a series of check boxes are in a control group, List Mode is entered when you press straight down on a Whiz Wheel.

The Whiz Wheels provide this functionality in many areas, Windows Explorer, Outlook, Word tool bars, and even on the Windows Desktop.

Advance Bars

  -------------------- -----------------
  Description          Command
  Pan Left             Left Bar Left
  Pan Right            Right Bar Right
  Braille Prior Line   Left Bar Right
  Braille Next Line    Right Bar Left
  -------------------- -----------------

To summarize: The advance bar on the right moves you forward, down through the document. The left advance bar moves you backward, up through the document. The outside of the advance bars move horizontally, and the inside move vertically.

Braille Lite M40 Commands

Windows Commands

Navigating Text

Editing and Selecting Commands

Selecting with the Cursor Routing Keys

Cursor Commands

Braille Commands

JAWS Commands

HTML Commands

Windows Commands

  --------------------------- --------------------
  Description                 Command
  TAB                         DOTS 4-5
  SHIFT+TAB                   DOTS 1-2
  Start Menu                  DOTS 3-4 (ST sign)
  Minimize all applications   DOTS 1-4-5 (D)
  Activate Menu Bar           DOTS 3-5
  ALT+TAB                     DOTS 4-5-7
  ENTER                       DOT 8
  Backspace                   DOT 7
  Delete                      DOTS 1-4-5-7 CHORD
  ESC                         DOTS 1-3-5-6 (Z)
  Next Document Window        DOTS 2-4-5-6
  --------------------------- --------------------

Navigating Text

  ----------------------------- ------------------
  Description                   Command
  Auto Advance Mode             DOTS 7-8
  Increase Auto Advance Speed   DOT 4 CHORD
  Decrease Auto Advance Speed   DOT 1 CHORD
  Prior Line                    DOT 1
  Next Line                     DOT 4
  Move to Beginning of Line     DOT 2
  Move to End of Line           DOT 5
  Move Left                     DOT 3
  Move right                    DOT6
  Page Down                     DOTS 4-6
  Page Up                       DOTS 1-3
  Braille top                   DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD
  Braille bottom                DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD
  Top of File                   DOTS 1-2-3
  Bottom of File                DOTS 4-5-6
  ----------------------------- ------------------

Editing and Selecting Commands

  ----------------------------- ------------------
  Description                   Command
  Cut                           DOTS 1-3-4-6 (X)
  Copy                          DOTS 1-4 (C)
  Paste                         DOTS 1-2-3-6 (V)
  Undo                          DOTS 1-3-6 (U)
  Select Next Line              DOTS 4-7
  Select Previous Line          DOTS 1-7
  Select Next Character         DOTS 6-7
  Select Previous Character     DOTS 3-7
  Select from Top               DOTS 1-2-3-7
  Select to Bottom              DOTS 4-5-6-7
  Select to Beginning of Line   DOTS 2-7
  Select to End of Line         DOTS 5-7
  Select Prior Screen           DOTS 1-3-7
  Select Next Screen            DOTS 4-6-7
  Select All                    DOTS 2-3-4-7
  ----------------------------- ------------------

Selecting with the Cursor Routing Keys

To select with the cursor routing keys, press and hold down DOT 7, then press the cursor routing key above the text where you wish to begin the selection. Release both keys. Move to where you wish to end the selection, and press DOT 7 plus the cursor routing key at that location. Use any navigation commands to move from the begin point to the end point of the text you are selecting, even the Whiz wheels, but if the window containing the text scrolls, this affects what information is selected.

Cursor Commands

  -------------------------------- ------------------
  Description                      Command
  PC Cursor                        DOTS 1-2-3-4 (P)
  Route PC to JAWS                 DOTS 3-4-6-8
  JAWS Cursor                      DOTS 2-4-5 (J)
  Route JAWS to PC                 DOTS 3-6-8
  Route Braille to Active Cursor   DOTS 1-2-3-5 (R)
  Braille Follows Active           DOTS 1-2-4 (F)
  Active Follows Braille           DOTS 2-3-4-5
  Restrict Braille Cursor          DOTS 2-5 CHORD
  Change Cursor Shape              DOTS 1-4-6 CHORD
  -------------------------------- ------------------

Braille Commands

  ------------------------------------- ------------------------------------
  Description                           Command
  Toggle Grade 2                        DOTS 1-2-4-5 (G)
  Expand Current Word                   DOTS 1-5 (E)
  Adjust Braille Options                DOTS 1-3-5 CHORD or DOTS 1-2 CHORD
  Toggle 6 and 8 Dot Braille            DOTS 2-3-6
  Toggle 8/Unlimited Pixels per Space   DOTS 2-3-6 CHORD
  Toggle Braille Mode                   DOTS 1-3-4
  Toggle Line Mode                      DOTS 2-3
  Toggle Attribute Marking              DOTS 1-3-4 CHORD
  Toggle Characters/Attributes          DOTS 1-6 CHORD
  Assign Color Marking                  DOTS 1-4 CHORD
  Repeat Last Flash Message             DOTS 1-2-4 CHORD
  ------------------------------------- ------------------------------------

JAWS Commands

  ------------------------------------ --------------
  Description                          Command
  Context Sensitive Help (INSERT+F1)   DOTS 2-8
  Keyboard Help                        DOTS 1-4-5-6
  JAWS Window                          DOTS 2-4-5-8
  Adjust JAWS Verbosity                DOTS 1-3-5-8
  Window List                          DOTS 3-5-6-8
  System Tray List                     DOTS 1-3-8
  Select a Synthesizer                 DOTS 2-3-4-8
  Say Font                             DOTS 1-2-4-8
  Read Entire Window                   DOTS 1-2-8
  Say Default Button in Dialog         DOTS 1-5-8
  Shut Down JAWS                       DOTS 2-5-8
  Run JAWS Manager                     DOTS 2-3-8
  Graphics Labler                      DOTS 1-2-3-8
  JAWS Find                            DOTS 2-3-5-8
  JAWS Find Next                       DOTS 2-5-8
  Mute Synthesizer                     DOTS 1-4-6
  ------------------------------------ --------------

HTML Commands

  --------------- --------------
  Description     Command
  List Headings   DOTS 2-3-5
  List Links      DOTS 2-3-5-6
  List Frames     DOTS 3-5-8
  --------------- --------------

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Type Lite

The Type Lite, with its 40 cell refreshable Braille display and laptop style, PC keyboard, provides tactile access to JAWS supported applications. Toggle the switch on the left edge of the TypeLite toward the front of the unit to enter Notetaker mode.

Advance Bars and Rockers

Reading and Editing Commands

Navigation

Settings and Informational

Cursor Commands

Search

Text Selection

Advance Bars and Rockers

The advance bars are fully functional when used with JAWS. In the Default mode, the bars move the display but they do not pull the focus with them.

·         Pressing the right side of the right bar moves the display 40 cells to the right. It will wrap when it reaches the end of the line.

·         Pressing the left side of the right bar moves the display vertically down the screen. It does not return you to the left edge of the screen.

·         Pressing the right side of the left bar will move the display up the screen. It does not return display to the left edge of the screen.

·         Pressing the left side of the left bar moves the display 40 cells to the left and wraps at the left margin.

To summarize: The advance bar on the right moves you forward, down through the document. The left advance bar moves you backward, up through the document. The outside of the advance bars move horizontally, and the inside move vertically.

  -------------------- ---------------------
  Description          Command
  Pan Left             Left Bar Left
  Pan Right            Right Bar Right
  Braille Prior Line   Left Bar Right
  Braille Next Line    Right Bar Left
  HOME                 Left Rocker Middle
  END                  Right Rocker Middle
  Prior Line           Right Rocker Up
  Next Line            Right Rocker Down
  Braille Prior Line   Left Rocker Up
  Braille Next Line    Left Rocker Down
  Top of File          Both Rockers Up
  Bottom of File       Both Rockers Down
  -------------------- ---------------------

When using Left Rocker up and down, the system focus does not move with the Braille display. When using the Right Rocker Up and Down, the system focus does move with the Braille display.

Reading and Editing Commands

  ----------------- ------------------
  Description       Command
  Prior Character   LEFT ARROW
  Next Character    RIGHT ARROW
  Prior Line        UP ARROW
  Next Line         DOWN ARROW
  Prior Word        CTRL+LEFT ARROW
  Next Word         CTRL+RIGHT ARROW
  Prior Paragraph   CTRL+UP ARROW
  Next Paragraph    CTRL+DOWN ARROW
  Cut               X
  Copy              C
  Paste             V
  ----------------- ------------------

Navigation

  -------------------- -----------------------------------
  Description          Command
  Page Up              FN+UP ARROW
  Page Down            FN+DOWN ARROW
  Home                 FN+LEFT ARROW
  End                  FN+RIGHT ARROW
  Desktop              D
  Start Menu           S
  Menu Bar             B
  Next Non-link Text   N (Internet Explorer and Outlook)
  Enter                ENTER
  Escape               ESC
  Backspace            BACKSPACE
  Tab                  TAB
  -------------------- -----------------------------------

Settings and Informational

  ------------------------------------- ---------------
  Description                           Command
  Toggle 8/Unlimited Pixels per Space   P
  Toggle Braille Mode                   T
  Toggle Attribute Marking              M
  Toggle Grade Two Braille              G
  Expand Current Word                   E
  Keyboard Help                         QUESTION MARK
  Repeat Last Flash Message             ALT+H
  ------------------------------------- ---------------

Cursor Commands

  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------
  Description                      Command
  PC Cursor                        Left end of left advance bar+right rocker down
  JAWS Cursor                      Left end of left advance bar+right rocker up
  Route Braille to Active Cursor   R
  Route JAWS Cursor to PC          Right rocker up+right end of left advance bar
  Route PC Cursor to JAWS          Right rocker up+right end of left advance bar
  Braille Follows Active           A
  Active Follows Braille           Z
  -------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------

Search

  ---------------- ---------
  Description      Command
  JAWS Find        F
  JAWS Find Next   3
  ---------------- ---------

Text Selection

  --------------------------- -------------------------------------------
  Description                 Command
  Select From Start of Line   Left rocker up+right rocker down
  Select to End of Line       Right rocker up+left rocker down
  Select From Top             Left rocker middle+right rocker up
  Select From Bottom          Left rocker middle+right rocker down
  Braille Select Text         Right rocker middle+routing
  Select Current Item         SPACEBAR
  Say Selected Text           Right end of advance bar+left rocker down
  --------------------------- -------------------------------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Lite 2000

The versatile Braille Lite 2000 18-cell display is ideal for use with JAWS. Compact, it has two great advantages over other braille displays. First, it does double duty, acting both as a personal note-taking product and as a braille display. Second, the Braille Lite 2000 has a braille keyboard. This makes it easy to develop, remember and execute a large set of commands.

Preparing Your Notetaker

To use your Braille Lite as a braille display, first verify that the following parameters are set in the Status menu:

·         9600 Baud

·         No Parity

·         8 Data Bits

·         1 Stop Bit

·         Hardware Handshaking

·         Half Duplex

Next, open the Speech Parameters menu by pressing DOTS 3-4-5 CHORD, and then press DOTS 1-2-3-4 CHORD. Your notetaker is now ready to act as a braille display. Repeat this process to return to using the unit as a stand alone notetaker.

The Two Keyboard Modes

The Keyboard of the Braille Lite 2000 is used either to navigate to the display and perform JAWS commands, or to type text. To use the braille keyboard for input, enter Edit mode with DOTS 1-2-4-6 CHORD. In edit mode, you have much less control over your braille display because there are not enough possible keystrokes to allow for both braille input and a full range of JAWS commands. While in Edit Mode, press DOTS 2-3-4-5 CHORD to switch between inputting in Grade 2 and inputting in computer braille. While it is possible to display and input in Grade 2 at the same time, your input and your output may be inconsistent. Although this key is a toggle, every time you enter Edit mode, you are in computer braille. To use the Braille Lite strictly as a braille display, enter navigation mode with DOTS 1-3-4-5 CHORD.

Selecting

Windows contains a number of commands that allow you to highlight or select things from the keyboard. These commands can all be performed from your notetaker using keys in combination with SPACEBAR.

  ----------------------------------------- ------------------
  Description                               Command
  Select Next Line                          DOT 4 CHORD
  Select Previous Line                      DOT 1 CHORD
  Select Previous Word                      DOT 2 CHORD
  Select Next Word                          DOT 5 CHORD
  Select Previous Character                 DOT 3 CHORD
  Select Next Character                     DOT 6 CHORD
  Select From Top to Cursor                 DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD
  Select From Cursor to Bottom              DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD
  Select From Cursor to Beginning of Line   DOTS 1-3 CHORD
  Select From Cursor to End of Line         DOTS 4-6 CHORD
  Select Current                            DOTS 1-3-4 CHORD
  Unselect All but Current                  DOTS 1-3-6 CHORD
  ----------------------------------------- ------------------

Cursors

The following commands control different cursors. DOTS 1-4 affect the PC Cursor, and DOTS 2-5 affect the JAWS Cursor. DOTS 3-6 toggles between the JAWS and PC cursor. Adding SPACEBAR performs routing functions. Here are the specific commands.

  ------------------------- ----------------
  Description               Command
  PC Cursor                 DOTS 1-4
  Route PC to JAWS          DOTS 1-4 CHORD
  JAWS Cursor               DOTS 2-5
  Route JAWS to PC          DOTS 2-5 CHORD
  Toggle JAWS and PC        DOTS 3-6
  Route Braille to Active   DOTS 3-6 CHORD
  Route Braille to PC       DOTS 1-3-4-6
  Route Braille to JAWS     DOTS 2-3-5-6
  ------------------------- ----------------

Movement Commands

  -------------------------- --------------------------
  Description                Command
  Pan Right                  Right End of Advance Bar
  Pan Left                   Left End of Advance Bar
  Braille Prior Line         DOT 1
  Braille Next Line          DOT 4
  Braille Move Left          DOT 2
  Braille Move Right         DOT 5
  Character Left             DOT 3
  Character Right            DOT 6
  Braille Top of Window      DOTS 1-2-3
  Braille Bottom of Window   DOTS 4-5-6
  -------------------------- --------------------------

Single Letter Commands

The following single letter commands perform basic JAWS or Windows functions.

+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Description                         | Command                           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Grade 2 Translation                 | DOTS 1-2-4-5                      |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Expand Current Word                 | DOTS 1-5                          |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Minimize All Apps                   | DOTS 1-4-5                        |
|  (Move to Desktop)                  |                                   |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Activate Menu Bar (ALT)             | DOTS 1-3-4                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| TAB                                 | DOTS 2-4                          |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| SHIFT+TAB                           | DOTS 2-4 CHORD                    |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Start Menu                          | DOTS 3-4                          |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ALT+TAB                             | DOTS 1-2-5-6                      |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| JAWS Window                         | DOTS 2-4-5                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Say Selected Text                   | DOTS 2-3-4                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Window List Dialog                  | DOTS 2-3-4-5                      |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ESC                                 | DOTS 1-3-5-6                      |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Hot Key Help                        | DOTS 1-2-5                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| JAWS Find                           | DOTS 1-2-4                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| JAWS Find Next                      | DOTS 2-3-5                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Toggle 6/8 Dot Mode                 | DOTS 2-3-6                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Toggle 8/Unlimited Pixels per Space | DOTS 2-3-6 CHORD                  |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Linking The Braille Display To The Active Cursor

DOTS 1-6 toggles whether the braille display follows the active cursor. By using it, you can always see where your active cursor is or you can watch what happens at a certain location as you type characters.

DOTS 1-6 CHORD toggles Active Follows Braille. When on, the braille display moves the PC Cursor. When off, the braille display does not move the active cursor. This is the mode that those who have used braille displays with PCs in the past will find most familiar.

Other Commands

Delete

DOTS 4-5 CHORD

  ------------------------------ ------------------
  Description                    Command
  Toggle Current/Line Mode       DOTS 2-3
  Toggle Braille Mode            DOTS 2-3 CHORD
  Attribute Marking              DOTS 5-6
  Attribute Marking Off          DOTS 5-6 CHORD
  Toggle Characters/Attributes   DOTS 4-5
  Mute Synthesizer               DOTS 1-4-6
  Adjust Braille Options         DOTS 1-2-3-6
  Drag and Drop                  DOTS 1-4-5 CHORD
  Backspace                      DOTS 1-2 CHORD
  Page Down                      DOTS 4-6
  Page Up                        DOTS 1-3
  ------------------------------ ------------------

Unassigned Commands

The commands for Braille Auto Advance, increasing/decreasing Auto Advance reading speed, and repeating the last Braille Flash Message are not assigned to keystrokes. To assign keystrokes to these commands, use Keyboard Manager.

Turning Off Blinking Characters

The Braille Lite 2000 cannot blink a single character. If you have cursor blinking set to on, the cursor blinks the entire display. To solve this problem, follow the instructions below to turn cursor blinking off:

1.    Open Settings Center (INSERT+F2) and select Default in the Applications combo box.

2.    Select the Braille group in the tree view, and then the Cursor group.

3.    Expand the PC Cursor group, and then the Braille Cursor group.

4.    Select Cursor State and press SPACEBAR to select the always up or always down radio buttons.

5.    Choose OK to save changes and close Settings Center.

To change JAWS Cursor settings, repeat this process, but select the JAWS Cursor group instead.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Lite 40

Introduction

The versatile Braille Lite 40 is ideal for use with JAWS. Compact, it has two great advantages over other braille displays. First, it does double duty, acting both as a personal note-taking product and as a braille display. Second, the Braille Lite 40 has a braille keyboard. This makes it easy to develop, remember and execute a large set of commands.

Preparing Your Notetaker

To use your Braille Lite as a braille display, first verify that the following parameters are set in the Status menu:

·         9600 Baud

·         No Parity

·         8 Data Bits

·         1 Stop Bit

·         Hardware Handshaking

·         Half Duplex

Next, open the Speech Parameters menu by pressing DOTS 3-4-5 CHORD, and then press DOTS 1-2-3-4 CHORD. Your notetaker is now ready to act as a braille display. Repeat this process to return to using the unit as a stand alone notetaker.

The Two Keyboard Modes

The Keyboard of the Braille Lite 40 is used either to navigate and perform JAWS commands, or to type text. To use the braille keyboard for input, enter Edit mode with DOTS 1-2-4-6 CHORD. In edit mode, you have much less control over your braille display because there are not enough possible keystrokes to allow for both braille input and a full range of JAWS commands. While in Edit Mode, press DOTS 2-3-4-5 CHORD to switch between inputting in grade 2 and inputting in computer braille. While it is possible to display and input in grade 2 at the same time, your input and your output may be inconsistent. Although this key is a toggle, every time you enter Edit mode, you are in computer braille. To use the Braille Lite 40 strictly as a braille display, enter navigation mode with DOTS 1-3-4-5 CHORD.

Selecting

Windows contains a number of commands that allow you to highlight or select things from the keyboard. These commands can all be performed from your notetaker using keys in combination with SPACEBAR.

  ----------------------------- ------------------
  Description                   Command
  Select Next Line              DOT 4 CHORD
  Select Previous Line          DOT 1 CHORD
  Select Previous Word          DOT 2 CHORD
  Select Next Word              DOT 5 CHORD
  Select Previous Character     DOT 3 CHORD
  Select Next Character         DOT 6 CHORD
  Select to Top of File         DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD
  Select to End of File         DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD
  Select to Beginning of Line   DOTS 1-3 CHORD
  Select to End of Line         DOTS 4-6 CHORD
  Select Current                SPACEBAR
  Unselect All but Current      DOTS 1-3-6 CHORD
  ----------------------------- ------------------

Cursors

The following commands control different cursors. DOTS 1-4 affect the PC cursor, and DOTS 2-5 affect the JAWS cursor. DOTS 3-6 toggles between the JAWS and PC cursor. Adding SPACEBAR to the commands performs routing functions. Here are the specific commands.

  ------------------------- ----------------
  Description               Command
  PC Cursor                 DOTS 1-4
  Route PC to JAWS          DOTS 1-4 CHORD
  JAWS Cursor               DOTS 2-5
  Route JAWS to PC          DOTS 2-5 CHORD
  Toggle JAWS/PC Cursor     DOTS 3-6
  Route Braille to Active   DOTS 3-6 CHORD
  Route Braille to PC       DOTS 1-3-4-6
  Route Braille to JAWS     DOTS 2-3-5-6
  ------------------------- ----------------

Moving the Display

The advance bars on the Braille Lite 40 move the display without moving the active cursor. Moving horizontally will wrap at the beginning or end of a line, however moving vertically does not return you to the beginning of the line. The following table shows each of these commands.

  -------------------- -----------------
  Description          Command
  Pan Left             Left Bar Left
  Pan Right            Right Bar Right
  Braille Prior Line   Left Bar Right
  Braille Next Line    Right Bar Left
  -------------------- -----------------

Moving the Cursor

  ----------------------------- ----------------
  Description                   Command
  Auto Advance Mode             DOTS 7-8
  Increase Auto Advance Speed   DOTS 4-8 CHORD
  Decrease Auto Advance Speed   DOTS 1-7 CHORD
  Prior Line                    DOT 1
  Next Line                     DOT 4
  Braille Move Left             DOT 2
  Braille Move Right            DOT 5
  Character Left                DOT 3
  Character Right               DOT 6
  Braille Top                   DOTS 1-2-3
  Braille Bottom                DOTS 4-5-6
  ----------------------------- ----------------

JAWS and Windows Commands

The following commands perform basic JAWS or Windows functions.

  ------------------------------------- ------------------
  Description                           Command
  Grade 2 Translation                   DOTS 1-2-4 CHORD
  Expand Current Word                   DOTS 1-5
  Minimize All Apps                     DOTS 1-4-5
  Menu Bar                              DOTS 1-3-4
  TAB                                   DOTS 2-4
  SHIFT+TAB                             DOTS 2-4 CHORD
  Start Menu                            DOTS 3-4
  ALT+TAB                               DOTS 1-2-5-6
  BACKSPACE                             DOT 7
  ENTER                                 DOT 8
  JAWS Window                           DOTS 2-4-5
  Say Selected Text                     DOTS 2-3-4
  Window List                           DOTS 2-3-4-5
  ESC                                   DOTS 1-3-5-6
  Hot Key Help                          DOTS 1-2-5
  JAWS Find                             DOTS 1-2-4
  JAWS Find Next                        DOTS 2-3-5
  Toggle 6/8 Dot Mode                   DOTS 2-3-6
  Toggle 8/Unlimited Pixels per Space   DOTS 2-3-6 CHORD
  ------------------------------------- ------------------

Linking the Braille Display to the Active Cursor

DOTS 1-6 toggles whether the braille display follows the active cursor. By using it, you can always see where your active cursor is or you can watch what happens at a certain location as you type characters.

DOTS 1-6 CHORD toggles Active Follows Braille. When on, the braille display moves the PC cursor as is done in Braille Lite Stand-alone mode. When off, the braille display will not move the active cursor. This is the mode that those who have used braille displays with PCs in the past will find most familiar.

Other Commands

  ----------------------------- ------------------
  Description                   Command
  Toggle Current/Line Mode      DOTS 2-3
  Toggle Braille Mode           DOTS 2-3 CHORD
  Attribute Marking             DOTS 5-6
  Attribute Marking Off         DOTS 5-6 CHORD
  Toggle Character/Attributes   DOTS 4-5
  Mute Synthesizer              DOTS 1-4-6
  Adjust Braille Options        DOTS 1-2-3-6
  Drag and Drop                 DOTS 1-4-5 CHORD
  BACKSPACE                     DOTS 1-2 CHORD
  Delete                        DOTS 4-5 CHORD
  PAGE DOWN                     DOTS 4-6
  PAGE UP                       DOTS 1-3
  Repeat Last Flash Message     DOTS 1-2-4 CHORD
  ----------------------------- ------------------

Turning Off Blinking Characters

If cursor blinking is on, the cursor may cause the entire display to blink. If this occurs, do the following to turn cursor blinking off:

1.    Open Settings Center (INSERT+F2) and select Default in the Applications combo box.

2.    Select the Braille group in the tree view, and then the Cursor group.

3.    Expand the PC Cursor group, and then the Braille Cursor group.

4.    Select Cursor State and press SPACEBAR to select the always up or always down radio buttons.

5.    Choose OK to save changes and close Settings Center.

To change JAWS Cursor settings, repeat this process, but select the JAWS Cursor group instead.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

PAC Mate Portable Braille Display

Adding Support During JAWS Installation

To add support for the PAC Mate Braille displays during JAWS installation, select either the Guided or Advanced setup option. On the Select Components page of setup, check the "PAC Mate 20 or 40 Cell" check box. On all other pages of setup, select the options you need and/or desire. Your PAC Mate Braille display is ready to use once the setup is complete.

Adding Support After JAWS Installation

To add support for a PAC Mate Braille display after JAWS is already installed:

1.    Press INSERT+J to make the JAWS application window active.

2.    Press ALT+O, L to open the Braille Basic Settings dialog.

3.    Move to the Add Braille Display button and press SPACEBAR.

4.    Once JAWS setup is open to the Select Braille Components dialog, use the SPACEBAR to check the "PAC Mate 20 or 40 Cell" check box, and then press ENTER.

Once setup has installed support for the PAC Mate display and JAWS has restarted, you are ready to use your PAC Mate Braille display.

Using the Keyboard / Laptop Stand

The foam keyboard stand positions your keyboard or laptop computer for easy use with the PAC Mate Braille display.

To arrange each device, place the foam stand on a table or desk with the cut away area near and facing you. Slide the Braille display into the cut away area. Then place the keyboard or laptop on the foam stand at a comfortable distance for you to read and work.

Using the Braille Display

Braille display settings are quickly accessed with hot keys and navigation is provided via Whiz Wheels, cursor routing buttons and right and left advance.

With JAWS as your screen reader, you can customize the hot keys. To learn more about customizing the hot keys on your Braille display, please refer to information on the JAWS Keyboard Manager .

Hot Keys

Hot keys allow for quick access to various Braille display options. The 14 hot keys are in the top row of buttons and consist of seven buttons on either side of the center mark. To help you locate and distinguish each hot key there are markers on the display’s surface furthest away from you. The buttons to the left of center are numbered from left to right as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and the buttons to the right of center are numbered as 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. The remaining buttons to the left and right of the hot keys are the advance buttons.

 

  --------- -----------------------------------------------------------
  Hot Key    Command
  1         Auto Advance mode
  2         Repeat Last Flash Message
  3         Route Braille to PC Cursor
  4         Toggle Active follows Braille
  5         Toggle Braille follows active
  6         Show top of active window or beginning of structured line
  7         SHIFT+TAB
  8         TAB
  9         Show bottom of active window or end of structured line
  10        Grade II (Contracted Braille)
  11        Translate word
  12        Route Braille to Active Cursor
  13        Decrease Auto Advance speed
  14        Increase Auto Advance speed
  --------- -----------------------------------------------------------

Whiz Wheels

The Braille display Whiz Wheels are used to quickly move through files, dialogs, and menus. In addition, each wheel can be set independently for added functionality. For more information, see the help topic for Focus Whiz Wheels.

Files

In text files, the Whiz Wheels are used to move by line, sentence, or paragraph. Pressing down on either Whiz Wheel toggles it between line, sentence, and paragraph or panning mode. Rolling the Whiz Wheel towards you moves you downward, while rolling the Whiz Wheel away from you moves you upward. With panning mode, rolling the Whiz Wheel one “click” towards you pans right one-display length, while rolling the Whiz Wheel one “click” away from you pans left one-display length.

Menus

In menus, roll a Whiz Wheel toward you to move down through the menu or roll it away from you to move up through the menu. Press down on the Whiz Wheel to select a menu item.

Dialogs

In dialogs, rolling the wheel towards you moves you forward through the controls, while rolling the wheel away from you moves you backwards through the controls. Depending on the control, the Whiz Wheels function differently when pressed.

·         For list views, combo boxes, radio buttons, tree views and check box control groups, pressing the Whiz Wheel down puts it in List Mode. In this mode, rolling the Whiz Wheel lets you scroll through the items. To exit List Mode, press down on the Whiz Wheel again.

·         For individual check boxes or buttons, pressing the Whiz Wheel down toggles the check box state or activates the button.

Cursor Routing Buttons

The display has cursor routing buttons, which is the row of buttons immediately above each Braille cell. Press a cursor routing button to move the cursor to that point or select a link in a web page or email message. To help you locate and route your cursor there are markers at every fifth cell along the display surface nearest you.

Left and Right Advance

The advance buttons allow you to move through your files one display length at a time. To advance left, press any of the buttons to the left of the hot key area. To advance right, press any of the buttons to the right of the hot key area.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

ALVA Introduction

In this section of JAWS help, you can find the JAWS functions that are assigned to keys on the ALVA Braille displays. There is also a description of each function and often some tips on the use of it. Also, there is a topic about navigating in Windows with JAWS and an ALVA Braille display, and what kind of information can be shown on the Braille display. Finally, there is a topic on technical issues like setting up the Braille display, installing Braille drivers, et cetera.

The key assignments for ALVA Braille displays enable use of standard Windows functions through the Braille display, like opening the Start Menu or selecting text and copying it to the clipboard. You can start JAWS management tools, change the layout of the Braille display, use speech commands, get information about controls or help on Windows and more, without having to take your hands from the Braille display.

Many of the functions that are supported by the ALVA Braille key mappings are assigned to a single key or to combinations of adjacent keys that can be activated with only one finger. Related functions are assigned to keys placed logically on the Braille display. These properties make the new key assignments easy to remember.

The following topics are provided to assist you in quickly learning to use your ALVA Braille display with JAWS.

Navigation and Display Modes

Using the ALVA DOS Screen Reader in Combination with JAWS

ALVA Satellite Series

ALVA Satellite Series - Quick Reference ALVA Satellite Series - Key Names
 ALVA Satelite Series - Key Assignments
 ALVA Satellite Series - Installation

ALVA ABT3 and Delphi Series

ALVA ABT3 and Delphi Series - Quick Reference
 ALVA ABT3 and Delphi Series - Key Names
 ALVA ABT3 and Delphi Series - Key Assignments
 ALVA ABT3 and Delphi Series - Installation

ALVA MPO Series

 ALVA MPO Series - Quick Reference
 ALVA MPO Series - Key Names
 ALVA MPO Series - Key Assignments
 ALVA MPO Series - Installation

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Navigation and Display Modes

In JAWS, there are several ways of navigating Windows and of showing information on the Braille display.

There are four navigation modes: PC cursor, JAWS cursor, Braille cursor, and invisible cursor. The navigation mode you choose determines which commands you can use for navigation and whether the Braille display follows the focus item or the mouse pointer.

Furthermore there are four display modes for the Braille display: Line mode, Structured mode, Speech Output mode, and Attribute mode. These determine what kind of information is shown on the Braille display.

Use the following links to jump to the section of interest:

Navigation Modes

Display modes

Information in the Status Cells

Braille Describe Item

Navigation Modes

PC Cursor

This is the most common used navigation mode. When the PC cursor is active, speech and Braille follow the focus item in menus and dialog windows. In text edit fields, for example the Microsoft Word document window, speech and Braille follow the caret when the PC cursor is active. The way focus information is displayed on the Braille display depends on which display mode is active.

For navigating in PC cursor mode, the standard Windows keyboard commands can be used, like Pressing the TAB key to move to the next control in a dialog box or the ALT key to go to the menu bar. Some of these functions can also be activated using the keys on your ALVA Braille display.

A "P" is displayed in the status cells of your Braille display if the PC cursor is active.

JAWS Cursor

When the JAWS cursor is active, speech and Braille follow the mouse pointer on the screen. The arrow keys can be used to move the mouse pointer around in the active window. This way it is possible to read information that is not accessible with the PC cursor, such as buttons in some toolbars. The Windows keyboard commands cannot always take you to the toolbar, but the JAWS cursor can. You can also use the SLASH or the ASTERISK on the numeric keypad to perform a left or right mouse click respectively.

A "J" is displayed in the status cells if the JAWS cursor is active.

You can toggle between the PC and JAWS cursors by pressing the BACK EAR key on an ALVA Satellite series Braille display. On an ALVA ABT 3 or Delphi series Braille display, the PROG1 key is used to toggle between PC and JAWS cursor.

Braille Cursor

The Braille cursor navigation mode becomes active automatically when you use the navigation keys at the front of your ALVA Braille display. When you use the keyboard again, the navigation mode that was active prior to using the front keys becomes active again.

When JAWS is in Braille cursor mode, you can use the Braille navigation keys to move your Braille display around the active window without moving the focus or the mouse pointer. You can use the cursor routing keys on the ALVA Braille display to route the caret to that position or perform a mouse click on the specified location.

It is not indicated in the status cells that the Braille cursor is active. The fourth status cell indicates the prior navigation mode, which will be come active again when you use the keyboard.

Invisible Cursor

When the invisible cursor is active, you can use the arrow keys to move around the active Window in much the same manner as you would with the JAWS cursor. In invisible cursor mode, only speech follows the cursor movements. The Braille display will stay on the same position. The Invisible cursor can be compared to the Braille cursor in the sense that you do not interfere with the focus or the mouse pointer. Both the Braille cursor and the Invisible cursor are used to review the active window. The invisible cursor generally is not used a lot by Braille users.

Pressing the DASH on the numeric keypad twice within a second activates the Invisible cursor. An "I" is displayed in the status cells when the invisible cursor is active.

Display Modes

Line Mode

In Line mode, the Braille display shows the line of text at the position of the active cursor. When the PC cursor is active, it displays the line where the focus or the caret is located. When the JAWS cursor is active, it displays the line where the mouse pointer is located.

When you use the Braille navigation keys on the front of your ALVA Braille display, you can read the active window line by line without interfering with other cursors. There is a toggle function to make the active cursor follow the Braille display. In this way you can move the active cursor with the navigation keys on your ALVA Braille display.

Line mode is indicated by an "l" in the fourth status cell (if available).

Structured Mode

In Structured mode, the information you read on the Braille display is not an exact copy of the screen as it is in Line mode. In Structured mode, you get more detailed information on the context of the current control. This information is comparable to the kind of information you get in speech when you change focus from one application to another (when you use ALT+TAB). For example, when the focus is on the filename edit, in the open dialog in Word, the Braille display will look as follows (in this example the text "Readme.txt" appears in the edit field):

Open dlg Filename: Edit readme.txt

From left to right, you first read "Open dlg", which means that the focus is somewhere in the Open dialog. Next you read "Filename: Edit", which means that the focus is in the Filename edit field. And last but not least you will find the actual text in the edit field, "Readme.txt," in this case. Check boxes and radio buttons are represented as an "x" between greater than and lesser than symbols "< >". If the checkbox is unchecked the "x" is replaced by an empty space. You can use the cursor routing key to check or clear a checkbox.

Sometimes, for example when a dialog consists of several tab pages, the structured mode information is longer than the number of cells on your Braille display. In that case, you can use the Braille navigation keys on the front of your ALVA Braille display to pan left or right.

As mentioned before, in Structured mode, information on the focus item is displayed. This implies that you must use the Windows standard keys to navigate the focus. You cannot use the Braille navigation keys to move around the window.

Structured mode is indicated by an "S" in the fourth status cell (if available).

Speech Output Mode

In Speech Output mode, the text that is sent to the speech synthesizer is also sent to the Braille display. Even if no speech synthesizer is installed, you might see the Speech Output mode as subtitles for the speech synthesizer. If multiple strings of text are sent to the synthesizer, only the last one is displayed. Use the UP and DOWN front panel keys on the Braille display to browse through the history of strings that have been sent. When a string is longer than the number of cells on the Braille display, use the LEFT and RIGHT front panel keys to pan through the text from left to right.

Speech Output mode is indicated by an "X" in the fourth status cell (if available).

Attribute Mode

In attribute mode, JAWS indicates all attributes assigned to a block of text with a letter or symbol. Attributes can include such changes as bold, italics, underline, and so on. When multiple attributes are assigned to the same block of text, the Braille display cycles through each of them.

Information in the Status Cells

The information in the status cells of the Braille display depends on the number of status cells present on the display. ALVA Braille displays have either five or three status cells.

Use the following links to jump to the topic of interest:

Braille displays with five status cells

Braille displays with three status cells

Braille Displays with Five Status Cells

The following ALVA Braille displays have five status cells:

·         ALVA Delphi 480

·         ABT 380

The upper six dots of the first three status cells indicate the horizontal location of the cursor on the screen in pixels.

In the fourth status cell, the navigation mode is indicated:

·         P means PC cursor is active

·         J means JAWS cursor is active

·         I means Invisible cursor is active

·         The Braille cursor is not represented in the status cells.

The fifth status cell indicates the display mode:

·         L means Line mode is active

·         S means Structured mode is active

·         X means Speech Output mode is active

Dots seven and eight of the first four status cells are used to indicate the coverage of the Braille display. If dots seven and eight are up for all four status cells, all text on the current line on the screen is displayed on the Braille display. If dot seven and eight are down in the first status cell, there is more text on the screen left from the text that is displayed on the Braille display. In this case you will have to pan to the left to read this text. If dot seven and eight are down in the fourth status cell, there is more text on the screen right from the text which is displayed on the Braille display, so you will have to pan to the right to read this text.

Braille Displays with Three Status Cells

The following ALVA Braille displays have three status cells:

·         ALVA 570 Satellite Pro

·         ALVA 584 Satellite Pro

·         ALVA 544 Satellite

·         ALVA 544 Traveller

·         ALVA Delphi 440

·         ABT 340

JAWS does not use the upper six dots of the first two status cells. Horizontal location of the cursor is not indicated in the status cells.

In the upper six dots of the third status cell, the navigation mode is indicated:

·         P means PC cursor is active

·         J means JAWS cursor is active

·         I means Invisible cursor is active

·         The Braille cursor is not represented in the status cells.

The display mode is not indicated in the status cells on Braille displays with 3 status cells.

Dots seven and eight of all status cells are used to indicate the coverage of the Braille display. If dots seven and eight are up for all status cells, all text on the current line on the screen is displayed on the Braille display. If dot seven and eight are down in the first status cell, there is more text on the screen left from the text that is displayed on the Braille display. In this case you will have to pan to the left to read this text. If dot seven and eight are down in the last status cell, there is more text on the screen right from the text which is displayed on the Braille display, so you will have to pan to the right to read this text.

Braille Describe Item

Braille describe item is not really a display mode. It is a JAWS function that is inspired by Structured mode. The main disadvantage of Structured mode is the fact that you are stuck to the focus item. For example, you cannot browse the active window with the Braille cursor.

The Braille Describe Item function is used in Line mode. You can move around the Window with the JAWS cursor, the Braille cursor, or the Invisible cursor and click the Double Touch Cursor on an item you want to know more about. The Braille Describe Item function gives you a speech message about the context of the item you clicked.

For example, pressing the Double Touch Cursor above the word "OK" gives you a speech message about the context of the item you clicked (an OK button most likely). For example, when you see the text "Search for:" on your ALVA Braille display and you click on a Double Touch Cursor above "Find," you will get the following speech message:

"This is prompt text to edit field "Search for:" on tab page "Find" in dialog "Search and replace" in application "Microsoft Word - Document 1.""

Depending on the JAWS verbosity setting, you can also get a message in telegraph style.

It is the same kind of information you would get on your Braille display in structured mode. The advantage is that you do not have to have the focus on an item to get this information. You just have to click the Double Touch Cursor on any piece of text in the window. You can even get information on items that cannot have the focus, like toolbar buttons or the status bar.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Quick Reference ALVA Satellite Series

You may use the following links to jump to the topic of interest:

Basic Braille Navigation

Speech Commands

Document Navigation

Edit Commands

Focus Commands

Braille Indicators and Layout

JAWS Cursor Routing

JAWS Management Tools

JAWS Help

Basic Braille Navigation

UP  Move to previous line

DOWN  Move to next line

TUMBLER 1 LEFT  Move left by one Braille segment (Only available on ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro)

TUMBLER 2 LEFT  Move left by one Braille segment (Only available on ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro)

LEFT  Move left by one Braille segment

TUMBLER 2 RIGHT  Move right by one Braille segment (Only available on ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro)

RIGHT  Move right by one Braille segment

TUMBLER 1 RIGHT  Move right by one Braille segment (Only available on ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro)

HOME  Move Braille display to top of Window

HOME+DOWN  Move Braille to bottom of window

CURSOR  Route Braille to position of active cursor

TC  Mouse click/caret routing

DTC  Braille right mouse click

Speech Commands

NORTH PAD  Announce window title in speech

WEST PAD  Read current word in speech

EAST PAD  Read current line in speech

SOUTH PAD  Read bottom line of window in speech

FORWARD EAR  Read dialog box in Tab order

BACK EAR+FORWARD EAR  Read whole window/document

EAST PAD+SOUTH PAD  Read selected text

NORTH PAD+SOUTH PAD  Mute Synthesizer

HOME+TC  Read font at TC position

HOME+DTC  Braille describe item

Document Navigation

UP PAD  Item Up

DOWN PAD  Item Down

LEFT PAD  Item Left

RIGHT PAD  Item Right

HOME+RIGHT  Go to Bottom of File

HOME+LEFT  Go to Top of File

Edit Commands

CURSOR+STATUS1  Cut To clipboard (CTRL+X)

CURSOR+STATUS2  Copy To clipboard (CTRL+C)

CURSOR+STATUS3  Paste From clipboard (CTRL+V)

CURSOR+TC  Select text

EAST PAD+SOUTH PAD  Announce selected text

Focus Commands

UP PAD+RIGHT PAD  Activate menu bar

DOWN PAD +LEFT PAD  Open Start menu

DOWN PAD+RIGHT PAD  Minimize All Windows

FORWARD TAB  Move to next control

BACK TAB+FORWARD TAB  Activate control

BACK TAB  Move to prior control

UP TAB+DOWN TAB  Move up one menu level

LEFT TAB+RIGHT TAB  Move to parent folder

Braille Indicators and Layout

STATUS1  Toggle Display mode

DTC1  Toggle Grade 2

STATUS2  Toggle attribute marking

DTC2  Toggle between text and attribute mode

STATUS3  Toggle Braille keys move active cursor

DTC3  Toggle spatial representation

JAWS Cursor Routing

BACK EAR  Toggle between PC cursor and JAWS cursor.

CURSOR  Route Braille to position of active cursor

HOME+STATUS1  Route JAWS cursor to PC cursor

HOME+DTC1  Route PC cursor to JAWS cursor

JAWS Management Tools

HOME+STATUS2  Activate JAWS Preferences Window

HOME+DTC2  Close JAWS

 

HOME+DTC3  Open JAWS Manager list box

JAWS Help

LEFT+UP  Hot key help

RIGHT+DOWN  Screen sensitive help

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Key Names for the ALVA Satellite Series

On the front of the ALVA Satellite series Braille displays, you will find the navigation keys and some function keys. On top of the display above the Braille cells, you will find two rows of touch cursors. On both sides of the display just below the Braille cells, you will find the so called Satellite pads.

Front Panel Keys

From left to right, the front panel keys are:

TUMBLER1  Left tumbler key (ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro only)

HOME  Round front panel key at the left

LEFT  Rectangular key with bend at the left

UP  Rectangular key with line mark at the top

DOWN  Rectangular key with line mark at the bottom

RIGHT  Rectangular key with bend at the right

CURSOR  Round front panel key at the right

TUMBLER2  Right tumbler key (ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro only)

Windows Satellite Keypad

One of the two satellite keypads will be used for issuing Windows commands. By default this will be the satellite keypad on the right hand side of the Braille display. The following names will be used in the documentation:

BACK TAB  Left outer circular key

FORWARD TAB  Right outer circular key

LEFT PAD  Left inner circular key

UP PAD  Top inner circular key

DOWN PAD  Bottom inner circular key

RIGHT PAD  Right inner circular key

JAWS Satellite Keypad

The second keypad is defined by the functionality of JAWS. Examples are speech-related functions, extended Braille functionality, and toggles. By default the satellite keypad located at the left-hand side of the ALVA Satellite will be assigned to the JAWS functionality.

The following names will be used in the documentation:

BACK EAR  Left outer circular key

FORWARD EAR  Right outer circular key

WEST PAD  Left inner circular key

NORTH PAD  Top inner circular key

SOUTH PAD  Bottom inner circular key

EAST PAD  Right inner circular key

Touch Cursors

The two rows of touch cursors above the Braille cells can both be divided into two sections, the ones above the reading cells and those above the status cells. The touch cursors above the reading cells in the first row are simply named "TC" (Touch Cursor). The touch cursors above the status cells are named "TC1" through "TC3."

The touch cursors above the reading part in the second row are named "DTC" (Double Touch Cursor). The ones above the status cells are named "DTC1" through "DTC3."

Keynames in JAWS

The above explains how ALVA decided to name its keys and this convention is used throughout these topics. In the JAWS Keyboard Manager however, a slightly different naming convention is used. First of all, all keys or key combinations on any Braille display are prefixed by the word "Braille". Furthermore the names that JAWS Keyboard Manager uses to identify the touch cursors and the keys on the satellite pads differ from the names ALVA gave them.

The following is a list of keys on the ALVA Satellite with the corresponding key labels in the JAWS Keyboard Manager:

TUMBLER1 left = Braille KEYPAD9

TUMBLER1 right = Braille KEYPAD10

HOME = Braille Home1

LEFT = Braille Left

UP = Braille Up

DOWN = Braille Down

RIGHT = Braille Right

CURSOR = Braille Cursor

TUMBLER2 left = Braille KEYPAD11

TUMBLER2 right = Braille KEYPAD12

BACK EAR = Braille F10

NORTH PAD = Braille F11

WEST PAD = Braille F12

SOUTH PAD = Braille F13

EAST PAD = Braille F14

FORWARD EAR = Braille F15

BACK TAB = Braille F16

UP PAD = Braille F17

LEFT PAD = Braille F18

DOWN PAD = Braille F19

RIGHT PAD = Braille F20

FORWARD TAB = Braille F21

The TC above the status cells are identified as "BRAILLE STATUS1" through "BRAILLE STATUS 3" and the DTC above the status cells are identified as "BRAILLE F1" through "BRAILLE F3." The TC and DTC above the reading cells are identified as "BRAILLE ROUTING" and " BRAILLE ROUTING2" respectively.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Key Assignments for the ALVA Satellite Series

This topic explains which keys or key combinations on the Braille Display you need to press in order to activate certain JAWS functions. For each function a short explanation is given about what this function does.

You may use the following links to jump to the topic of interest:

Basic Braille Navigation

Speech Commands

Document Navigation

Edit Commands

Focus Commands

Braille Indicators and Layout

JAWS Cursor Routing

JAWS Management Tools

JAWS Help

Basic Braille Navigation

UP - Move to previous line

This command moves your Braille display up one line vertically.

DOWN - Move to next line

This command moves your Braille display down one line vertically.

TUMBLER 1 LEFT - Move left by one Braille segment (only available on ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro)

TUMBLER 2 LEFT - Move left by one Braille segment (only available on ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro)

LEFT - Move left by one Braille segment

On an ALVA 570 or 584 Satellite pro, pressing one of the tumbler keys at the front panel to the left can also activate this function.

RIGHT - Move right by one Braille segment

Like the previous command, only now your Braille display is panned to the right. If there is no more text to the right of the current Braille segment, the Braille display is moved to the leftmost segment of the next line. This key is the most commonly used key on the Braille display, since it enables you to read on a piece of text.

On an ALVA 570 or 584 Satellite pro, pressing one of the tumbler keys at the front panel to the right can also
 activate this function.

TUMBLER 1 RIGHT - Move right by one Braille segment (only available on ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro)

TUMBLER 2 RIGHT - Move right by one Braille segment (only available on ALVA 570 and 584 Satellite Pro)

HOME - Move Braille display to top of Window

The Braille display is moved to the top of the window the active cursor is in. In most cases this command brings you to the window's title bar.

HOME+DOWN - Move Braille to bottom of window

The Braille display is moved to the bottom of the active window. If it is visible this command brings you to the status bar in most cases.

CURSOR - Route Braille to position of active cursor

If you are browsing the window with the Braille cursor in Line mode, this command takes you back to the caret or mouse pointer depending on which Navigation mode is indicated in the status cell.

TC - Mouse click/caret routing

Use the Touch Cursor to perform a mouse click on the screen at the location that corresponds to the position of the TC. In a word processor or a text editor, this will result in routing the caret to that position. For example, if you click the TC on a button, a hyperlink or a menu item, this will have the same effect as performing a mouse click on these items.

DTC - Braille right mouse click

This function performs a right mouse click on the screen, at the location corresponding with the position of the DTC on the Braille display. This can be particularly useful to get a context menu on items that provide one.

Speech Commands

NORTH PAD - Announce window title in speech

The title of the active window is spoken. If you are in a dialog or a document window, this command will first speak the title of the application window follow by the title of the document or the dialog window.

WEST PAD - Read current word in speech

Reads the word that contains the caret or the word the mouse pointer is located upon, depending on which display mode is active (PC cursor or JAWS cursor respectively). If the active cursor is on the first empty space after a word it will read the space, not the word. Spaces and other punctuation marks are treated as words.

EAST PAD - Read current line in speech

Reads the line that contains the active cursor.

SOUTH PAD - Read bottom line of window in speech

This command will speak the bottom line of the active window. In most cases this will be the status bar.

FORWARD EAR - Read dialog box in Tab order

All controls in a dialog box will be spoken in the same order as when you would use TAB to navigate through the dialog.

BACK EAR+FORWARD EAR - Read whole window/document

If the PC cursor is active, JAWS will read the complete document, beginning from the line the active cursor is on. The PC cursor will be dragged along the document. The speaking will not stop until the end of the document is reached or the user interrupts with the stop speech command. In that case the active cursor will be placed right at the beginning of the last spoken word.When the JAWS cursor or the invisible cursor is
 active, the current visible Window will be read instead of the document, starting from the line the active cursor is on and ending at the bottom of the Window.

EAST PAD+SOUTH PAD - Read selected text

This command reads any selected text in the active window. This can be particularly useful for example to check the selected text in a document or what items are selected in a multiple selection in a list box. Note however that only selected text or items that are visible on the screen are spoken.

NORTH PAD+SOUTH PAD - Mute Synthesizer

This command silences the speech synthesizer. To activate the synthesizer again, press NORTH PAD+SOUTH PAD once more.

HOME+TC - Read font at TC position

This function will produce a speech message containing information about the font, attributes and color of the character at the position of the Touch Cursor.

HOME+DTC - Braille describe item

Braille describe item gives you speech feedback about the context that is shown on the Braille display. For example, when you press HOME in combination with the DTC above a button you hear the label of the button, group box name, tab page, dialog title, and application title. For more information, refer to Braille Describe Item.

Document Navigation

UP PAD - Item Up

The active cursor is moved up one line in the current document. Same as pressing the UP ARROW key on the keyboard.

DOWN PAD - Item Down

The active cursor is moved down one line in the current document. Same as pressing the DOWN ARROW key on the keyboard.

LEFT PAD - Item Left

The active cursor is moved one character to the left in the current line. Same as pressing the LEFT ARROW key on the keyboard.

RIGHT PAD - Item Right

The active cursor is moved one character to the right in the current line. Same as pressing the RIGHT ARROW key on the keyboard.

HOME+RIGHT - Go to Bottom of File

The PC cursor is activated and routed to the end of a document or to the last item in a list, depending on the context in which this command is used.

HOME+LEFT - Go to Top of File

The PC cursor is activated and routed to the beginning of a document or to the first item in a list, depending on the context in which this command is used.

Edit Commands

CURSOR+STATUS1 Cut To clipboard (CTRL+X)

This command removes the selected text or items and copies it to the clipboard.

CURSOR+STATUS2 Copy To clipboard (CTRL+C)

This command copies the selected text or items to the clipboard.

CURSOR+STATUS3 Paste From clipboard (CTRL+V)

This command pastes the clipboard contents to the position of the active cursor.

CURSOR+TC Select text

The first time this command is used, the coordinates of the beginning of the block of text
 to be selected are stored and remarked with an eight dots Braille cursor. Then the user
 can move the Braille line to the end of the block and press CURSOR+TC again to select.

EAST PAD+SOUTH PAD Announce selected text

This command reads any selected text in the active window. This can be particularly
 useful for example to check the selected text in a document or what items are selected in
 a multiple selection in a list box. Note however that only selected text or items that are
 visible on the screen are spoken.

Focus Commands

UP PAD+RIGHT PAD - Activate menu bar

This command performs the same function as the ALT key. It activates the menu bar.

DOWN PAD +LEFT PAD - Open Start menu

Opens the Windows Start menu.

DOWN PAD+RIGHT PAD - Minimize All Windows

Reduces all windows to icons on the task bar. A nice side effect of this function is that it moves the focus to the desktop.

FORWARD TAB - Move to next control

This command moves the focus to the next control in a dialog box, according to the tab order. This function actually emulates the TAB key. So you can also use it to enter a tab stop in a Word processor.

BACK TAB+FORWARD TAB - Activate control

This function emulates the ENTER key. You can use this command to press a button for example. You can also use it in a Word processor to enter a carriage return.

BACK TAB - Move to prior control

This command moves the focus to the prior control in a dialog box, according to the tab order. You can use it for example, to move from the filename edit to the folder list view in the Open dialog in Microsoft Word. This key actually emulates the Windows keyboard command SHIFT+TAB.

UP TAB+DOWN TAB - Move up one menu level

You can use this function to move up one level in any menu. For example, when you are in a pull down menu, this function brings you back to the menu bar.

LEFT TAB+RIGHT TAB - Move to parent folder

This function emulates the BACKSPACE key. It can be used to move to the parent
 folder in Windows explorer.

Braille Indicators and Layout

STATUS1 - Toggle Display mode

You can use this command to toggle between display modes: Line mode, Structured mode, Speech Output mode, and Attribute mode.

DTC1 - Toggle Grade 2

Toggles between standard Braille and Grade 2 Braille.

STATUS2 - Toggle attribute marking

JAWS uses dot 7 and 8 on the Braille display to mark that a character has certain attributes. This command displays a lists of text attributes which you can select to have marked with dot 7 and 8. Move to attributes with arrow keys and press SPACEBAR to toggle them on or off.

DTC2 - Toggle between text and attribute mode

In attribute mode, the Braille display does not show the text on the screen but only the attributes of that text. Bold characters are represented by a "b," italic characters by an "I," underlined characters with a "u" etc. With this key you can toggle attribute mode on

STATUS3 - Toggle Braille keys move active cursor

Normally you can use the Braille navigation key on the front of your ALVA Braille display to browse the window without moving the focus or the mouse pointer. If you turn on this function, you can use the Braille navigation keys to move the active cursor. It can be especially useful for reading a document in Braille. You can just keep pressing RIGHT whenever you are finished reading a Braille segment and read until the end of the document this way. Each time you press RIGHT, JAWS will take along the PC cursor.

DTC3 - Toggle spatial representation

For spatial representation, JAWS represents every eight pixels of empty space on the screen with a space on the Braille display. So when there are 32 pixels of empty space, you get 4 spaces. When spatial representation is off, JAWS will represent an empty space with one space on the Braille display, indifferent of the width of the empty space.

JAWS Cursor Routing

BACK EAR - Toggle between PC cursor and JAWS cursor.

This key changes the Navigation mode from PC cursor to JAWS cursor and vice versa.

CURSOR - Route Braille to position of active cursor

If you are browsing the window with the Braille cursor in Line mode, this command takes you back to the caret or mouse pointer depending on which Navigation mode is indicated in the fourth status cell.

HOME+STATUS1 - Route JAWS cursor to PC cursor

The JAWS cursor is routed to the position of the active cursor and made active. If you switch to JAWS cursor, you may loose track because the mouse pointer maybe anywhere on the screen. With this function the JAWS cursor is made active on a position that is already displayed on the Braille display.

HOME+DTC1 - Route PC cursor to JAWS cursor

If possible, the PC cursor is routed to the position of the mouse pointer. Using this function when the mouse pointer is on a clickable item will result in activating this item. It is not possible to route the PC cursor to a place that cannot have focus, like the windows title bar for example.

JAWS Management Tools

HOME+STATUS2 - Activate JAWS Preferences Window

This function activates the JAWS main window. It is equivalent to pressing INSERT+J. Since the JAWS main window consists only of an empty window and a menu bar, the Braille display will be empty when you use this function. Press HOME+UP or the ALT key on the keyboard to go to the menu bar.

HOME+DTC2 - Close JAWS

This function closes JAWS. You will first get a dialog to make sure you want to shut down JAWS. After that JAWS stops speaking. It would be wise to assign a shortcut key to the JAWS shortcut in the Start menu so you can start JAWS again.

 

HOME+DTC3 - Open JAWS Manager list box

This function opens a list box where you can choose one of the JAWS managers: Dictionary Manager, Frame Manager, Graphics Labeler, Keyboard Manager, Script Manager, Settings Center, and Window Class Reassign. If you activate the selected utility, it automatically loads the settings file for the active application program.

JAWS Help

LEFT+UP - Hot key help

This function describes JAWS keystrokes specific to the active application.

RIGHT+DOWN - Screen sensitive help

This command displays a help message for the current control or window.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Installation of the ALVA Satellite Series

The JAWS CD-ROM contains everything you need to install and use your ALVA Satellite Braille display with JAWS. To install the necessary software for your ALVA Satellite you only need to select the ALVA Satellite series from a list of Braille components in the JAWS installer. We advise you to keep your Braille display disconnected from the PC during the installation process. This guarantees easy installation and prevents the Add New Hardware Wizard, part of your Windows operating system from being started. After the installation has been successfully completed you can connect the Braille display to the PC and switch it on.

If you have already installed JAWS but you have not yet selected an ALVA Satellite, you can easily add your Braille display.

1.    Open the JAWS program window (INSERT+J).

2.    Press ALT+O to open the Options menu.

3.    Move to Braille and press ENTER.

4.    Move to the Add Braille Display button and press SPACEBAR.

5.    In the Select Braille Components dialog, select the ALVA Satellite series from the list of Braille displays and select the Next button to continue.

6.    Go through the remaining dialogs and finish the installation of the Braille display.

Further details about the installation of an ALVA Satellite can be found in the user manual of your Braille display and in the file, readme.txt, which is present on the root of the ALVA Braille Display Drivers CD-ROM that came with your Braille display.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Quick Reference ABT3 and ALVA Delphi Series

You may use the following links to jump to the topic of interest:

Basic Braille Navigation

Speech Commands

Document Navigation

Edit Commands

Focus Commands

Braille Indicators and Layout

JAWS Cursor Routing

JAWS Management Tools

JAWS Help

Basic Braille Navigation

UP   Move to previous line

LEFT   Move left by one Braille segment

RIGHT   Move right by one Braille segment

DOWN   Move to next line

HOME   Move Braille display to top of Window

HOME+DOWN  Move Braille to Bottom of Window

CURSOR  Route Braille to position of Active Cursor

TC   Mouse click/caret routing

CURSOR+DTC  Braille right mouse click (Only ALVA Delphi series)

Speech Commands

PROG+UP  Announce window title in speech

PROG+LEFT  Read current word in speech

PROG+RIGHT  Read current line in speech

PROG+DOWN  Read bottom line of window in speech

PROG+UP+LEFT  Read dialog box in Tab order

PROG+TC  Read font at TC position

DTC   Braille Describe Item (Delphi only)

PROG+DTC1  Stop speech (Delphi only)

PROG+DTC2  Read whole window/document (Delphi only)

PROG+DTC3  Announce selected text (Delphi only)

PROG+DTC4  Mute Synthesizer (Delphi only)

Document Navigation

HOME+LEFT  Go to Top of File

HOME+RIGHT  Go to Bottom of File

Edit Commands

CURSOR+STATUS1 Cut To clipboard (CTRL+X)

CURSOR+STATUS2 Copy To clipboard (CTRL+C)

CURSOR+STATUS3 Paste From clipboard (CTRL+V)

CURSOR+STATUS4 Undo (CTRL+Z) (not available on ABT 340)

CURSOR+TC  Select text

PROG+DTC3  Announce selected text (Delphi only)

Focus Commands

CURSOR+UP  Open Start menu

CURSOR+DOWN  Minimize All Windows

HOME+UP  Activate menu bar

UP+LEFT  Move to prior control

LEFT+RIGHT  Activate control

RIGHT+DOWN  Move to next control

CURSOR2  Move to prior control (80 cells display only)

HOME2   Activate control (80 cells display only)

PROG2   Move to next control (80 cells display only)

Braille Indicators and Layout

PROG+HOME  Toggle Grade 2

STATUS1  Toggle Display mode

STATUS2  Toggle attribute marking

STATUS3  Toggle spatial representation

DTC1   Toggle Braille keys move active cursor (Delphi only)

DTC2   Toggle between text and attribute mode (Delphi only)

DTC3   Toggle between 6 and 8 dot Braille (Delphi only)

STATUS4  Toggle Braille keys move active cursor (Not available on ABT340)

STATUS5  Toggle between text and attribute mode (80 cell Braille displays only)

STATUS6  Toggle between 6 and 8 dot Braille (80 cell Braille displays only)

HOME+CURSOR  Toggle Braille keys move active cursor

PROG+CURSOR  Toggle between text and attribute mode

DTC4   Braille tracks active cursor on/off (Delphi only)

DTC5   Turn off attribute marking (ALVA Delphi 480 only)

JAWS Cursor Routing

PROG   Toggle between PC and JAWS cursor

CURSOR  Route Braille To position of Active Cursor

HOME+STATUS1  Route JAWS Cursor to PC

HOME+STATUS2  Route PC to JAWS Cursor

HOME+STATUS3  Route Braille to PC

HOME+STATUS4  Route Braille to JAWS (Delphi only)

JAWS Management Tools

PROG+STATUS1  Activate JAWS Preferences Window

 

PROG+STATUS3  Start Graphics Labeler.

PROG+STATUS4  Close JAWS (Delphi Only)

PROG+STATUS5  Open JAWS Manager list box (Delphi 480 only)

JAWS Help

PROG+LEFT+RIGHT Hot key help

PROG+RIGHT+DOWN Screen sensitive help

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keynames for ABT 3 and ALVA Delphi Series

On the front of the ABT 3 and ALVA Delphi series Braille displays, you will find the navigation keys and some function keys. On top of the displays above the Braille cells, you will find one or two rows of touch cursors. The ALVA ABT3 series has one row of touch cursors. The ALVA Delphi series has two rows.

The three leftmost front keys on the Braille displays are named "PROG1," "HOME1," and "CURSOR1." The four keys to the right of these are the navigation keys. They are named "UP," "LEFT," "RIGHT," and "DOWN." If you have an 80-cell Braille display, like the ABT 380 or the ALVA Delphi 480 MultiMedia, you will find three more keys, right from the navigation keys. These are named "CURSOR2," "HOME2," and "PROG2."

The first row of touch cursors above the Braille cells can be divided into two sections, the ones above the reading cells and those above the status cells. The ones above the reading cells are simply named "TC" (Touch Cursor). The touch cursors above the status cells are named "TC1" through "TCn," where n stands for the number of status cells.

On an ALVA Delphi Series Braille display, you will find a second row of touch cursors. The touch cursors above the reading part in the second row are named "DTC" (Double Touch Cursor). The ones above the status cells are named "DTC1" through "DTCn," where n stands for the number of status cells.

Keynames in JAWS

The above explains how ALVA decided to name its keys and this convention will be used throughout these topics. In the JAWS keyboard manager however, a slightly different naming convention is used. First of all, all keys or key combinations on any Braille display are prefixed by the word "Braille." Furthermore the names that JAWS Keyboard Manager uses to identify the touch cursors differ from the names ALVA gave them.

The front keys are identified as follows (from left to right): "BRAILLE PROG1," "BRAILLE HOME1," "BRAILLE CURSOR1," "BRAILLE UP," "BRAILLE LEFT," "BRAILLE RIGHT," "BRAILLE DOWN," "BRAILLE CURSOR2," "BRAILLE HOME2," and "BRAILLE PROG2" (the last three available on 80 cells displays only).

The TC above the status cells are identified as "BRAILLE STATUS1" through "BRAILLE STATUSN." The DTC above the status cells are identified as "BRAILLE F1" through "BRAILLE FN" (where n stands for the number of status cell plus one). The TC and DTC above the reading cells are identified as "BRAILLE ROUTING" and " BRAILLE ROUTING2" respectively.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Key assignments for the ABT 3 and ALVA Delphi series

This topic explains the keys or key combinations on the braille display you need to press in order to activate certain JAWS functions. For each function a short explanation is given about what this function does.

You may use the following links to jump to the topic of interest:

Basic Braille Navigation

Speech Commands

Document Navigation

Edit Commands

Focus Commands

Braille Indicators and Layout

JAWS Cursor Routing

JAWS Management Tools

JAWS Help

Basic Braille Navigation

UP - Move to previous line

This command moves your braille display up one line vertically.

LEFT - Move left by one Braille segment

This command pans your braille display to the left exactly the number of characters on the reading part of your braille display. Words may be cut off at the beginning or at the end of the braille display. If there is no more text to the left of the current Braille segment, the braille display is moved to the rightmost segment of the prior line.

RIGHT - Move right by one Braille segment

Like the previous command, only now your braille display is panned to the right. If there is no more text to the right of the current Braille segment, the braille display is moved to the leftmost segment of the next line. This key is the most commonly used key on the braille display, since it enables you to read through a block of text.

DOWN - Move to next line

This command moves your braille display down one line vertically.

HOME - Move braille display to top of Window

The braille display is moved to the top of the window the active cursor is in. In most cases this command brings you to the window's title bar.

HOME+DOWN - Move Braille to bottom of window

The braille display is moved to the bottom of the active window. If it is visible this command brings you to the status bar in most cases.

CURSOR - Route Braille to position of active cursor

If you are browsing the window with the Braille cursor in Line mode, this command takes you back to the caret or mouse pointer depending on which Navigation mode is indicated in the fourth status cell.

TC - Mouse click/caret routing

Use the Touch Cursor to perform a mouse click on the screen at the location that corresponds to the position of the TC. In a word processor or a text editor this will result in routing the caret to that position. For example, if you click the TC on a button, a hyperlink or a menu item, this will have the same effect as performing a mouse click on these items.

CURSOR+DTC - Braille right mouse click (Only ALVA Delphi series)

This function performs a right mouse click on the screen at the location corresponding with the position of the DTC on the braille display. This can be particularly useful to get a context menu for items that provide one.

Speech Commands

PROG+UP - Announce window title in speech

The title of the active window is spoken. If you are in a dialog or a document window, this command will first speak the title of the application window follow by the title of the document or the dialog window.

PROG+LEFT - Read current word in speech

Reads the word that contains the caret or the word the mouse pointer is located upon, depending on which display mode is active (PC cursor or JAWS cursor respectively). If the active cursor is on the first empty space after a word it will read the space, not the word. Spaces and other punctuation marks are treated as words.

PROG+RIGHT - Read current line in speech

Reads the line that contains the active cursor.

PROG+DOWN - Read bottom line of window in speech

This command will speak the bottom line of the active window. In most cases, this will be the status bar.

PROG+UP+LEFT - Read dialog box in Tab order

All controls in a dialog box will be spoken in the same order as when you would use TAB to navigate through the dialog.

PROG+TC - Read font at TC position

This function will produce a speech message containing information about the font, attributes and color of the character at the position of the Touch Cursor.

DTC - Braille describe item (Delphi only)

Braille describe item gives the user speech feedback about the context that is shown on the braille display. E.g. when you press the DTC above a button you hear the label of the button, group box name, tab page, dialog title, and application title. For more information, refer to href="navigation_and_display_modes.htm#Braille_Describe_Item">Braille Describe Item .

PROG+DTC1 - Stop speech (Delphi only)

Pressing this key will cause the speech synthesizer to stop speaking the current chunk of text. When another chunk of text is sent, it will start speaking again automatically.

PROG+DTC2 - Read whole window/document (Delphi only)

JAWS will read the complete document beginning from the line the active cursor is on. The speaking will not stop until the end of the document is reached or the user interrupts with the stop speech command. In that case, the active cursor will be placed right at the beginning of the last spoken word.

PROG+DTC3 - Announce selected text (Delphi only)

This command reads any selected text in the active window. This can be particularly useful, for example, to check what is selected in a multiple selection in a list box.

PROG+DTC4 - Mute Synthesizer (Delphi only)

This command silences the speech synthesizer. To activate the synthesizer again, press DTC4 once more.

Document Navigation

HOME+LEFT - Go to Top of File

The PC cursor is activated and routed to the beginning of a document or to the first item in a list, depending on the context in which this command is used.

HOME+RIGHT - Go to Bottom of File

The PC cursor is activated and routed to the end of a document or to the last item in a list, depending on the context in which this command is used.

Edit Commands

CURSOR+STATUS1 - Cut To clipboard (CTRL+X)

This command removes the selected text or items and copies it to the clipboard.

CURSOR+STATUS2 - Copy To clipboard (CTRL+C)

This command copies the selected text or items to the clipboard.

CURSOR+STATUS3 - Paste From clipboard (CTRL+V)

This command pastes the clipboard contents to the position of the active cursor.

CURSOR+STATUS4 - Undo (CTRL+Z) (not available on ABT340)

This command can be used in some cases to undo the last Windows function. It is not possible to undo JAWS commands this way.

CURSOR+TC - Select text

The first time this command is used, the coordinates of the beginning of the block of text to be selected are stored and remarked with an eight dot Braille cursor. Then the user can move the Braille line to the end of the block and press CURSOR+TC again to select.

PROG+DTC3 - Announce selected text (Delphi only)

This command reads any selected text in the active window. This can be particularly useful, for example, to check what is selected in a multiple selection in a list box.

Focus Commands

CURSOR+UP - Open Start menu

Opens the Windows Start menu

CURSOR+DOWN - Minimize All Windows

Reduces all windows to icons on the task bar. A nice side effect of this function is that it moves the focus to the desktop.

HOME+UP - Move Braille to menu bar

This command performs the same function as the ALT key. It activates the menu bar.

UP+LEFT - Move to prior control

This command moves the focus to the prior control in a dialog box, according to the tab order. You can use it for example, to move from the filename edit to the folder list view in the Open dialog in Microsoft Word. This key combination actually emulates the Windows keyboard command SHIFT+TAB.

LEFT+RIGHT - Activate control

This function actually emulates the ENTER key. You can use this command to press a button for example. You can also use it in a Word processor to enter a carriage return.

RIGHT+DOWN - Move to next control

This command moves the focus to the next control in a dialog box, according to the tab order. This key combination actually emulates the TAB key. So you can also use it to enter a tab stop in a Word processor.

CURSOR2 - Move to prior control (80 cells display only)

Same as UP+LEFT.

HOME2 - Activate control (80 cells display only)

Same as LEFT+RIGHT.

PROG2 - Move to next control (80 cells display only)

Same as RIGHT+DOWN.

Braille Indicators and Layout

PROG+HOME - Toggle Grade 2

Toggles between standard Braille and Grade 2 Braille.

STATUS1 - Toggle Display mode

You can use this command to toggle between the 3 navigation modes: Line mode, Structured mode and Speechbox mode.

STATUS2 - Toggle attribute marking

JAWS uses dot 7 and 8 on the braille display to mark that a character has certain attributes. This command displays a lists of text attributes which you can select to have marked with dot 7 and 8. Move to attributes with arrow keys and press SPACEBAR to toggle them on or off.

STATUS3 - Toggle spatial representation

For spatial representation, JAWS represents every eight pixels of empty space on the screen with a space on the braille display. So when there are 32 pixels of empty space, you get 4 spaces. When spatial representation is off, JAWS will represent an empty space with one space on the braille display, indifferent of the width of the empty space.

DTC1 - Toggle Braille keys move active cursor (Delphi only)

Normally you can use the Braille navigation key on the front of your ALVA braille display to browse the window without moving the focus or the mouse pointer. If you turn on this function, you can use the Braille navigation keys to move the active cursor. It can be especially useful for reading a document in Braille. You can just keep pressing RIGHT when ever you are finished reading a Braille segment and read until the end of the document this way. Each time you press RIGHT, JAWS will take along the PC cursor.

DTC2 - Toggle between text and attribute mode (Delphi only)

In attribute mode, the braille display does not show the text on the screen but only the attributes on that text. Bold characters are represented by a "b", italic characters by an "i", underlined characters with a "u" etc. With this key you can toggle attribute mode on and off.

DTC3 - Toggle between 6 and 8 dot Braille (Delphi only)

This command is used to switch between 8 dot and 6 dot Braille on the braille display.

STATUS4 - Toggle Braille keys move active cursor (Not available on ABT340)

Alternative for DTC1 on ABT380.

STATUS5 - Toggle between text and attribute mode (80 cell braille displays only)

Alternative for DTC2 on ABT380.

STATUS6 - Toggle between 6 and 8 dot Braille (80 cell braille displays only)

Alternative for DTC3 on ABT380.

HOME+CURSOR - Toggle Braille keys move active cursor

Alternative for DTC1 on ABT3 series.

HOME+CURSOR - Toggle between text and attribute mode (80 cell braille displays only)

Alternative for DTC2 on ABT380.

DTC4 - Braille tracks active cursor on/off (Delphi only)

Normally when you navigate with the JAWS or PC cursor, the braille display follows. You can turn this following off (and on again) by pressing PROG+HOME on the ALVA braille display.

DTC5 - Turn off attribute marking (ALVA Delphi 480 only)

This is a shortcut key to turn off attribute marking quickly. The alternative is pressing STATUS2 until you get to attribute marking off.

JAWS Cursor Routing

PROG - Toggle between PC cursor and JAWS cursor.

This key changes the Navigation mode from PC cursor to JAWS cursor and vice versa.

CURSOR - Route Braille to position of active cursor

If you are browsing the window with the Braille cursor in Line mode, this command takes you back to the caret or mouse pointer depending on which Navigation mode is indicated in the fourth status cell.

HOME+STATUS1 - Route JAWS cursor to PC cursor

The JAWS cursor is routed to the position of the active cursor and made active. If you switch to JAWS cursor, you may lose track because the mouse pointer maybe anywhere on the screen. With this function, the JAWS cursor is made active on a position that is already displayed on the braille display.

HOME+STATUS2 - Route PC cursor to JAWS cursor

If possible, the PC cursor is routed to the position of the mouse pointer. Using this function when the mouse pointer is on a clickable item will result in activating this item. It is not possible to route the PC cursor to a place that cannot have focus, like the windows title bar for example.

HOME+STATUS3 - Route Braille to PC cursor

This function routes the braille display to the item that has the focus. For example if you are browsing the window with the Braille cursor, this brings you back to the PC cursor.

HOME+STATUS4 - Route Braille to JAWS cursor (not available on ABT 340)

This function routes the braille display to the line the mouse pointer is on.

JAWS Management Tools

PROG+STATUS1 - Activate JAWS Preferences Window

This function activates the JAWS main window. It is equivalent to pressing INSERT+J. The JAWS main window contains only the JAWS version and a menu bar. Press HOME+UP or the ALT key on the keyboard to go to the menu bar.

 

PROG+STATUS3 - Start Graphics Labeler.

The Graphic labeler allows you to assign labels to graphics that JAWS finds on the screen. You can use this function only if the JAWS cursor is positioned on a graphic. The function Route JAWS cursor to PC cursor (HOME+STATUS1) can be particularly useful for positioning the JAWS cursor on a graphic)

PROG+STATUS4 - Close JAWS (not available on ABT 340)

This function closes JAWS. You will first get a dialog to make sure you want to shut down JAWS. After that JAWS stops speaking. It would be wise to assign a shortcut key to the JAWS shortcut in the Start menu so you can start JAWS again.

PROG+STATUS5 - Open JAWS Manager list box (80 cell braille displays only)

This function opens a list box where you can choose one of the JAWS managers: Dictionary Manager, Frame Manager, Graphics Labeler, Keyboard Manager, Script Manager, Settings Center, and Window Class Reassign. If you activate the selected utility, it automatically loads the settings file for the active application program.

JAWS Help

PROG+LEFT+RIGHT - Hot key help

This function describes JAWS keystrokes specific to the active application.

PROG+RIGHT+DOWN - Screen sensitive help

This command displays information about the current control or window.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Installation of the ALVA ABT3 and Delphi Series

Parallel versus Serial Connection with the ALVA ABT3 and Delphi Series

To change from parallel to serial connection and vice versa, simultaneously press the PROG, HOME and CURSOR-keys to enter local mode. Subsequently press one of the following TC buttons:

·         STATUS1 to switch over to parallel communication;

·         STATUS2 to switch over to serial communication on serial port 2;

·         STATUS3 to switch over to serial communication on serial port 1.

A short beep can be heard that indicates that a change has been made. The parallel or serial communication settings are remembered by the ABT, even when it is switched off.

Return to operation mode by pressing the PROG key.

Note: When serial communication with a PC does not function properly, see the section called "Serial connections (ser)" in the manual of your ALVA braille display and set the serial port to "alva" mode. In the case of no communication, the actual setting can be found in the status cells.

The status cells will show one of the following options:

·         p for parallel communication

·         s2 for communication via serial port 2

·         s1 for communication via serial port 1

(Referring to these connections on the ABT, not the computer).

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Quick Reference ALVA MPO Series

You may use the following links to jump to the topic of interest:

General

Basic Braille Navigation

Speech Commands

Document Navigation

Edit Commands

Focus Commands

Braille Indicators and Layout

JAWS Cursor Routing

JAWS Management Tools

JAWS Help

General

PROGRAM+DOTS 3-6  Start the MPO braille terminal

PROGRAM KEY  Exit the MPO braille terminal mode

PROGRAM+DOT 8  Show statuscells

DOT 8  Keyboard Enter

DOT 7  Keyboard Backspace

BRAILLE DOT KEYS  Keyboard alphanumerical input

Basic Braille Navigation

CANCEL  Move to previous line

OK  Move to next line

PREVIOUS VIEW  Move left by one Braille segment

NEXT VIEW  Move right by one Braille segment

DISCONNECT  Move Braille display to top of Window

CONNECT  Move Braille to bottom of window

MENU  Route Braille to position of active cursor

TOUCH CURSORS  Mouse click/caret routing

MENU+TOUCH CURSORS  Braille right mouse click

Speech Commands

VOL UP  Announce window title in speech

STOP SPEECH  Read current word in speech

MUTE  Read current line in speech

VOL DOWN  Read bottom line of window in speech

SPACE+DOTS 1-2  Read dialog box in Tab order

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-3-5  Read whole window/document

SPACE+DOTS 2-3-4  Read selected text

CANCEL+OK  Mute Synthesizer

DISCONNECT+TC  Read font at TC position

CONNECT+TC  Braille describe item

Document Navigation

CURSOR UP  Item Up

CURSOR DOWN  Item Down

CURSOR LEFT  Item Left

CURSOR RIGHT  Item Right

SPACE+DOTS 4-5-6  Go to Bottom of File

SPACE+CURSOR DOWN  Go to Bottom of File

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-3  Go to Top of File

SPACE+CURSOR UP  Go to Top of File

Edit Commands

SPACE+DOTS 1-3-4-6  Cut to Clipboard (CTRL+X)

SPACE+DOTS 1-4  Copy to Clipboard (CTRL+C)

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-3-6  Paste from Clipboard (CTRL+V)

SPACE+DOTS 2-3-4  Announce selected text

SPACE+TC  Display selected text

Focus Commands

SPACE+DOTS 1-3-4  Activate menu bar

SPACE+DOTS 3-4  Open Start menu

SPACE+DOTS 1-4-5  Minimize All Windows

SPACE+DOT 5  Move to next control

SPACE+DOTS 4-5  Move to prior control

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-4  JAWS Find

SPACE  Keyboard Space

DOT 8  Keyboard Enter

SPACE+DOTS 1-5  Windows Escape key command

DOT 7  Keyboard Backspace

SPACE+DOTS 2-5  Windows ALT+TAB combination

DOT KEYS  Keyboard alphanumerical input

Braille Indicators and Layout

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-4-5  Toggle Grade 2

SPACE+DOT 2  Toggle attribute marking

SPACE+DOT 6  Toggle attribute marking

SPACE+DOTS 2-3  Toggle between text and attribute mode

SPACE+DOT 4  Toggle Braille keys move active cursor

SPACE+DOTS 2-3-5-6  Toggle spatial representation

JAWS Cursor Routing

SPACE+DOT 3  Toggle between PC cursor and JAWS cursor

MENU  Route Braille to position of active cursor

SPACE+DOT 7  Route JAWS cursor to PC cursor

SPACE+DOT 8  Route PC cursor to JAWS cursor

JAWS Management Tools

SPACE+DOTS 2-4-5  Activate JAWS Preferences Window

SPACE+DOTS 1-3-6  Close JAWS

JAWS Help

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-5  Hot key help

SPACE+DOTS 1-3  Screen sensitive help

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Key Names for the ALVA MPO Series

As you hold the MPO with the keys facing upwards and the connectors oriented away from you, all of the braille keys and line of braille cells are situated on the top surface of the unit.

·         ON/OFF switch

·         A 9-key braille keyboard

·         Two menu keys

·         Six navigation keys

·         Six audio keys

·         Two braille scroll keys

·         Twenty touch cursors

The Braille Array and Touch Cursors

The Braille array is located on the upper half of the MPO and centered horizontally. The braille array consists of 20 braille cells. Above each braille cell is a corresponding touch cursor button.

The ON/OFF Switch

The ON/OFF switch is centered directly above the line of touch cursors along the top edge of your MPO. It is flush with the curvature of the case between the touch cursor and the flat surface at the top of the MPO. The braille keyboard

The spacebar is the middle key located in the group of three keys situated on the edge of the MPO closest to you. The spacebar is the ninth key in the set of keys which comprise the braille keyboard. The other eight braille keys are located directly above the spacebar: four braille keys on the left and four braille keys on the right. Place the four fingers of your left hand on top of the left set of four braille keys. Place four fingers of your right hand on top of the right braille keys. Your hands are now positioned over the eight dot braille keyboard. Your left forefinger is on key 1, your left middle finger is on key 2, your left ring finger is on key 3, and your left little finger is on key 7 (the Backspace key). Your right forefinger is on key 4, your right middle finger is on key 5, your right ring finger is on key 6, and your right little finger is on key 8 (the Enter key).

Use your forefingers, middle fingers, and ring fingers of your left and right hands to type standard braille characters. Use the little finger of your left hand to operate the Backspace key. Use the little finger of your right hand to operate the Enter key. Use your left or right thumb to depress the spacebar.

The Braille Scroll Keys

On the left and right sides of the MPO immediately below the braille array are the left and right braille scroll keys. The key on the left is the Scroll Left key and the key on the right is the Scroll Right key.

The Menu Keys

To the left of the space bar you will find the PROGRAM key. To the right of the space bar you will find the MENU key.

The Navigation Keys

Three navigation keys are located in the upper left corner of the MPO. The larger round key on the left is a four-way rocker switch called the Cursor Pad and has four tactile indicators representing the four directional positions in which this key can be pressed.

The other two navigation keys are located directly to the right of the cursor pad. The upper key is the CANCEL button and has a ribbed texture whereas the lower key is the OK button and has a smooth texture.

The Audio Keys

Three audio keys are located in the upper right corner of the MPO. The larger round key on the right is a four-way rocker switch called the Audio Pad and has four tactile indicators representing the four directional positions in which this key can be pressed: left (Stop Speech), right (Mute Speech), up (Volume Up), and down (Volume Down).

The other two audio keys are located directly to the left of the audio pad. The upper key is the DISCONNECT key and has a ribbed texture whereas the lower key is the CONNECT key and has a smooth texture.

Key Names in JAWS

MPO DISCONNECT = Braille Home1

MPO CONNECT = Braille Prog1

MPO PREVIOUS VIEW = Braille Left

MPO CANCEL = Braille Up

MPO OK = Braille Down

MPO NEXT VIEW = Braille Right

MPO MENU = Braille Cursor

MPO VOLUME UP = Braille F11

MPO STOP SPEECH = Braille F12

MPO VOLUME DOWN = Braille F13

MPO MUTE = Braille F14

MPO CURSOR UP = Braille F17

MPO CURSOR LEFT = Braille F18

MPO CURSOR DOWN = Braille F19

MPO CURSOR RIGHT = Braille F20

MPO SPACE = Braille F22

MPO DOT 1 = Braille F23

MPO DOT 2 = Braille F24

MPO DOT 3 = Braille F25

MPO DOT 4 = Braille F26

MPO DOT 5 = Braille F27

MPO DOT 6 = Braille F28

MPO DOT 7 = Braille F29

MPO DOT 8 = Braille F30

The TC above the status cells are identified as "BRAILLE STATUS1" through "BRAILLE STATUS 3." The TC above the reading cells are identified as "BRAILLE ROUTING".

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Key Assignments for the ALVA MPO Series

This topic explains which keys or key combinations on the Braille Terminal you need to press in order to activate certain JAWS functions. For each function a short explanation is given about what this function does.
 You may use the following links to jump to the topic of interest:

General

Basic Braille Navigation

Speech Commands

Document Navigation

Edit Commands

Focus Commands

Braille Indicators and Layout

JAWS Cursor Routing

JAWS Management Tools

JAWS Help

General

PROGRAM+DOTS 3-6 - Start the MPO braille terminal

Press this MPO key combination to start the MPO braille terminal with a hot key.

PROGRAM KEY - Exit the MPO braille terminal mode

Pressing the MPO PROGRAM key, you exit the MPO braille terminal mode and go to the MPO Programs menu.

PROGRAM+DOT 8 - Show status cells

Show the status cells.

DOT 8 - Keyboard Enter

The keyboard Enter key will be passed to the Windows application.

DOT 7 - Keyboard Backspace

The keyboard Backspace key will be passed to the Windows application.

BRAILLE DOT KEYS - Keyboard alphanumerical input

By pressing braille dot key combinations alphanumerical characters will be sent to the application.

Basic Braille Navigation

CANCEL - Move to previous line

This command moves your Braille display up one line vertically.

OK - Move to next line

This command moves your Braille display down one line vertically.

PREVIOUS VIEW - Move left by one Braille segment

NEXTVIEW - Move right by one Braille segment

Like the previous command, only now your Braille display is panned to the right. If there
 is no more text to the right of the current Braille segment, the Braille display is moved to
 the leftmost segment of the next line. This key is the most commonly used.

DISCONNECT - Move Braille display to top of Window

The Braille display is moved to the top of the window the active cursor is in. In most cases, this command brings you to the window's title bar.

CONNECT - Move Braille to bottom of window

The Braille display is moved to the bottom of the active window. If it is visible this
 command brings you to the status bar in most cases.

MENU - Route Braille to position of active cursor

If you are browsing the window with the Braille cursor in Line mode, this command takes you back to the caret or mouse pointer depending on which Navigation mode is indicated in the status cell.

TOUCH CURSORS - Mouse click/caret routing

Use the Touch Cursor to perform a mouse click on the screen at the location that corresponds to the position of the TC. In a word processor or a text editor, this will result in routing the caret to that position.

MENU+TOUCH CURSORS - Braille right mouse click

This function performs a right mouse click on the screen, at the location corresponding with the position of the TC on the Braille display. This can be particularly useful to get a context menu on items that provide one.

Speech Commands

VOL UP - Announce window title in speech

The title of the active window is spoken. If you are in a dialog or a document window, this command will first speak the title of the application window follow by the title of the document or the dialog.

STOP SPEECH - Read current word in speech

Reads the word that contains the caret or the word the mouse pointer is located upon, depending on which display mode is active (PC cursor or JAWS cursor respectively). If the active cursor is on the first empty space after a word, it reads the space.

MUTE - Read current line in speech

Reads the line that contains the active cursor.

VOL DOWN - Read bottom line of window in speech

This command speaks the bottom line of the active window. In most cases this is the status bar.

SPACE+DOTS 1-2 - Read dialog box in tab order

All controls in a dialog box will be spoken in the same order as when you would use TAB to navigate through the dialog.

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-3-5 - Read whole window/document

If the PC cursor is active, JAWS reads the complete document, beginning from the line the active cursor is on. The PC cursor is moved along with the document. Speech does not stop until the end of the document is reached or the user interrupts it.

SPACE+DOTS 2-3-4 - Read selected text

This command reads any selected text in the active window. This can be particularly useful to check the selected text in a document or what items are selected in a multiple selection in a list box.

CANCEL+OK - Mute Synthesizer

This command silences the speech synthesizer. To activate the synthesizer again, press NORTH PAD+SOUTH PAD once more.

DISCONNECT+TC - Read font at TC position

This function will produce a speech message containing information about the font, attributes, and color of the character at the position of the Touch Cursor.

CONNECT+TC - Braille describe item

This command gives you speech feedback about the context that is shown on the Braille display. For example, when you press HOME in combination with the TC above a button you hear the label of the button, group box name, tab page, dialog title, and application.

Document Navigation

CURSOR UP - Item Up

The active cursor is moved up one line in the current document. This is the same as pressing the UP ARROW key on the keyboard.

CURSOR DOWN - Item Down

The active cursor is moved down one line in the current document. This is the same as pressing the DOWN ARROW key on the keyboard.

CURSOR LEFT - Item Left

The active cursor is moved one character to the left in the current line. This is the same as pressing the LEFT ARROW key on the keyboard.

CURSOR RIGHT - Item Right

The active cursor is moved one character to the right in the current line. This is the same as pressing the RIGHT ARROW key on the keyboard.

SPACE+DOTS 4-5-6 - Go to Bottom of File

The PC cursor is activated and routed to the end of a document or to the last item in a list, depending on the context in which this command is used.

SPACE+CURSOR DOWN - Go to Bottom of File

The PC cursor is activated and routed to the end of a document or to the last item in a list, depending on the context in which this command is used.

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-3 - Go to Top of File

The PC cursor is activated and routed to the beginning of a document or to the first item in a list, depending on the context in which this command is used.

SPACE+CURSOR UP - Go to Top of File

The PC cursor is activated and routed to the beginning of a document or to the first item in a list, depending on the context in which this command is used.

Edit Commands

SPACE+DOTS 1-3-4-6 - Cut To clipboard (CTRL+X)

This command removes the selected text or items and copies it to the clipboard.

SPACE+DOTS 1-4 - Copy To clipboard (CTRL+C)

This command copies the selected text or items to the clipboard.

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-3-6 - Paste From clipboard (CTRL+V)

This command pastes the clipboard contents at the position of the active cursor.

SPACE+DOTS 2-3-4 - Announce selected text

This command reads any selected text in the active window. This can be particularly useful to check the selected text in a document or what items are selected in a multiple selection in a list box.

SPACE+TC - Display selected text

Press once to mark the start position of the block of text to be selected (the start is remarked with a eight dot Braille cursor). Move the braille line to the end of the block and press the keystroke again to select.

Focus Commands

SPACE+DOTS 1-3-4 - Activate menu bar

This command performs the same function as the ALT key. It activates the menu bar.

SPACE+DOTS 3-4 - Open Start menu

Opens the Windows Start menu.

SPACE+DOTS 1-4-5 - Minimize All Windows

Reduces all windows to icons on the task bar. This also moves the focus to the desktop.

SPACE+DOT 5 - Move to next control

This command moves the focus to the next control in a dialog box, according to the tab order. This function actually emulates the TAB key. So you can also use it to enter a tab stop in a Word processor.

SPACE+DOTS 4-5 - Move to prior control

This command moves the focus to the prior control in a dialog box, according to the tab order. You can use it, for example, to move from the File Name edit box to the folder list view in the Open dialog in Microsoft Word.

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-4 - JAWS Find

Finds text on the screen by presenting a dialog for input of text, direction, and choice to search for graphic or text.

SPACE - Keyboard Space

The keyboard Spacebar key is passed to the Windows application.

DOT 8 - Keyboard Enter

The keyboard Enter key is passed to the Windows application.

SPACE+DOTS 1-5 - Windows Escape key command

The keyboard Escape key is passed to the Windows application.

DOT 7 - Keyboard Backspace

The keyboard Backspace key is passed to the Windows application.

SPACE+DOTS 2-5 - Windows ALT+TAB combination

The keyboard ALT+TAB key combination is passed to the Windows application.

DOT KEYS - Keyboard alphanumerical input

By pressing braille dot key combinations alphanumerical characters are sent to the application.

Braille Indicators and Layout

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-4-5 - Toggle Grade 2

Toggles between standard Braille and Grade 2 Braille.

SPACE+DOT 2 - Toggle attribute marking

JAWS uses DOTS 7 and 8 on the Braille display to mark that a character has certain attributes. This command displays a lists of text attributes which you can select to have marked with DOTS 7 and 8. Move to attributes with arrow keys and press SPACEBAR to select an attribute.

SPACE+DOT 6 - Toggle attribute marking

JAWS uses DOTS 7 and 8 on the Braille display to mark that a character has certain attributes. This command displays a lists of text attributes which you can select to have marked with DOTS 7 and 8. Move to attributes with arrow keys and press SPACEBAR to select an attribute.

SPACE+DOTS 2-3 - Toggle between text and attribute mode

In attribute mode, the Braille display does not show the text on the screen but only the attributes of that text. Bold characters are represented by a "b," italic characters by an "i," underlined characters with a "u" and so on.

SPACE+DOT 4 - Toggle Braille keys move active cursor

Normally you can use the Braille navigation key on the front of your ALVA Braille display to browse the window without moving the focus or the mouse pointer. If you turn on this function, you can use the Braille navigation keys to move the active cursor.

SPACE+DOTS 2-3-5-6 - Toggle spatial representation

For spatial representation, JAWS represents every eight pixels of empty space on the screen with a space on the Braille display. So when there are 32 pixels of empty space, you get 4 spaces.

JAWS Cursor Routing

SPACE+DOT 3 - Toggle between PC cursor and JAWS cursor.

This command switches between the PC Cursor and JAWS Cursor.

MENU - Route Braille to position of active cursor

If you are browsing the window with the Braille cursor in Line mode, this command takes you back to the caret or mouse pointer depending on which Navigation mode is indicated in the fourth status cell.

SPACE+DOT 7 - Route JAWS cursor to PC cursor

The JAWS cursor is routed to the position of the active cursor and made active. If you switch to the JAWS cursor, you may loose track because the mouse pointer may be anywhere on the screen.

SPACE+DOT 8 - Route PC cursor to JAWS cursor

If possible, the PC cursor is routed to the position of the mouse pointer. Using this function when the mouse pointer is on a clickable item results in activating this item. It is not possible to route the PC cursor to a place that cannot have focus.

JAWS Management Tools

SPACE+DOTS 2-4-5 - Activate JAWS Preferences Window

This function activates the JAWS main window. It is equivalent to pressing INSERT+J. Since the JAWS main window consists only of an empty window and a menu bar, the Braille display will be empty when you use this function.

SPACE+DOTS 1-3-6 - Close JAWS

This function closes JAWS. You will first get a dialog to make sure you want to shut down JAWS. After that JAWS stops speaking. It is recommended that you assign a shortcut key to the JAWS shortcut in the Start menu so you can start JAWS again.

JAWS Help

SPACE+DOTS 1-2-5 - Hot key help

This function describes JAWS keystrokes specific to the active application.

SPACE+DOTS 1-3 - Screen sensitive help

This command displays a help message for the current control or window.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Installation of the ALVA MPO Series

The JAWS program DVD contains everything you need to install and use your ALVA MPO Braille display with JAWS. To install the necessary software for your ALVA MPO you only need to select the ALVA MPO series from a list of Braille components during JAWS Setup. It is recommended that you keep your ALVA MPO disconnected from your computer during the installation process.

Note: Make sure you install ActiveSync before installing the MPO drivers. See Installing ActiveSync for more information.

Installing ActiveSync

You must install ActiveSync before installing the MPO Braille display. To install ActiveSync, insert your MPO Software CD into your CD drive. Follow the instructions indicated once the CD starts. If your CD does not automatically start, run the file Welcome to MPO.htm in the root directory of the CD drive. You can now install the MPO as a Braille display in JAWS.

Installing the MPO with JAWS

Insert the JAWS program DVD into the appropriate drive. The JAWS installer automatically starts and guides you through the installation process. To install the ALVA MPO you need to select either Guided Install or Advanced Install in the Install Options dialog of the JAWS installer. In the following it is assumed that you select Guided Install. Complete the various dialogs of the installation program until you reach the Select Braille Components dialog. In this dialog, you can select one or more Braille displays from a list. Select the ALVA MPO Series and choose Next to continue. Complete the remaining dialogs and finish the installation.

If you have already installed JAWS but you have not yet installed the ALVA MPO drivers, follow the installation instructions that can be found on the MPO Software CD that came with your ALVA MPO.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

BRAILLEX Compact/Tiny/2D Lite

The topics listed below are for the Papenmeier Braille Displays BRAILLEX Compact, BRAILLEX Tiny, and BRAILLEX 2D Lite with JAWS.

Introduction

Function Key Layout

Standard Key Assignment for JAWS

Introduction

This document is a brief review of the functions of JAWS in conjunction with the Papenmeier Braille Displays BRAILLEX Compact, BRAILLEX Tiny, and BRAILLEX 2D Lite.

These displays have different shapes, and BRAILLEX 2D Lite also has a vertical display; however, they have the same function key layout and thus can use the same JAWS driver. Once you have installed this driver and you connect one of the above displays to the PC, the driver automatically detects which of the displays you use.

Note: For information about the hardware and detailed information regarding interfacing, refer to the Braillex Compact / Tiny / 2D Lite Reference Manual. For more information about JAWS, refer to your JAWS Quick Start Guide and the JAWS Online Help system.

Function Key Layout

BRAILLEX Compact, BRAILLEX Tiny, and BRAILLEX 2D Lite have 9 function keys on the front panel. From left to right, they have the following names:

[FN] [C] [RB] [UP] [H] [DN] [RF] [B] [A]

To ease your orientation, on BRAILLEX Compact and BRAILLEX Tiny, small vertical metal bars separate the navigation keys [RB] and [UP] and [DN] and [RF] from each other. On a BRAILLEX 2D Lite, RB and RF are larger than the other keys, so you can easily recognize them.

Note: Whenever you have to press 2 keys together more than once, you must release both of them each time!

Note: In the following, all BRAILLEX function keys are written in brackets.

Standard Key Assignment for JAWS

Function Keys Used Alone

·         [FN] = Toggle between JAWS cursor and PC cursor.

·         [C] = Move display to active cursor position.

·         [RB] = Read backwards - move display to the left.

·         [UP] = Move display one line up.

·         [H] = Toggle cursor presentation disabling (reveal character under cursor on/off).

·         [DN] = Move display one line down.

·         [RF] = Read forwards - move display to the right.

·         [B] = Toggle between JAWS cursor and PC cursor.

·         [A] = Disable attribute display.

PC Mode

In PC mode, you can navigate through an application. If you hold the central [H] key while pressing one of the other function keys, the Braille device will emulate PC keyboard functions.

·         [H]+[RB] = left arrow

·         [H]+[UP] = up arrow

·         [H]+[DN] = down arrow

·         [H]+[RF] = right arrow

·         [H]+[FN] = Esc

·         [H]+[C] = Shift+Tab

·         [H]+[B] = Tab

·         [H]+[A] = Enter

Braille Presentation

When pressing the [B] key along with some of the navigation keys, you access a number of Braille presentation functions. You can both toggle between 6 and 8-dot Braille presentation (in 6-dot mode, you disable dots 7 and 8), and toggle between text and attribute presentation. In attribute presentation mode, dots 1 through 4 show the text color, dots 5 through 8 the background color.

[B]+[UP] = Toggle between 6 and 8-dot Braille presentation.

[B]+[DN] = Toggle between text and attribute presentation.

Reveal Text Attributes

You can have the Braille Display reveal four different text attributes upon a keystroke. The Braille Display then underlines the corresponding portion of text with dots 7+8. In order to select the attribute to be revealed, press [A] plus one of the navigation keys:

·         [A]+[RB] = Reveal bold attribute.

·         [A]+[UP] = Reveal highlight attribute.

·         [A]+[DN] = Reveal italics attribute.

·         [A]+[RF] = Reveal underline attribute.

Routing

The mouse routing function works independently from the switch positions. In order to select text, hold the [H] key while you press a routing key:

·         Routing key = mouse routing.

·         [H] + routing key = Select text.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

BRAILLEX EL Displays

The topics listed below are for the Papenmeier BRAILLEX EL displays with JAWS.

Introduction

Easy Access Bar

Switches and Keys

Standard Key Assignment for JAWS

Introduction

This document is a brief review of the functions unique to JAWS in conjunction with the Papenmeier BRAILLEX EL displays (EL stands for "Efficiency Line", i.e., with:

BRAILLEX EL 2D-40: 40-cell Braille Display, 13-cell vertical display

BRAILLEX EL 2D-66: 66-cell Braille Display, 13-cell vertical display

BRAILLEX EL 80: 80+2-cell Braille Display, no vertical display

All BRAILLEX EL devices are equipped with the Easy Access Bar (EAB), a 54 cm (21") long key integrated in the front panel of the device, all along the Braille Display.

Traditional Braille Displays have a number of function keys on the front panel, or left and right of the display to navigate around the screen. In any case, you typically have to take at least one hand off the Braille Display when you navigate around the screen.

With the BRAILLEX EL devices, both screen navigation and often-used PC functions are accessible from any position on the Braille Display: You execute these functions with the thumb of the left or right hand. The reading hand(s) can remain at their position. Press the Easy Access Bar slightly to the left or to the right, up or down. When moved, the EAB activates internal switches that issue commands to the PC.

Besides the conventional Braille Display functions, the Easy Access Bar can also give access to functions of the PC keyboard or to speech functions. However you configure the meaning of the Easy Access Bar — you can execute the commands from any place on the Braille Display. This means less waving around with your hands, more comfort, and higher speed.

JAWS contains everything you will need to use the Braillex EL as a refreshable Braille display with JAWS. When installing JAWS, choose the Custom installation option, and then select Braillex EL as a refreshable Braille display.

Note: For information about BRAILLEX EL hardware and detailed information regarding interfacing, refer to the BRAILLEX EL Reference Manual. For more information about JAWS, refer to your JAWS Quick Start Guide and the JAWS Online Help system.

Easy Access Bar

The Easy Access Bar (EAB) integrated in the font of the BRAILLEX EL devices allows fast and easy navigation across the screen.

You can push the Easy Access Bar in all four directions, in two steps each direction. When you sit in front of the device and read the Braille Display, your thumbs are naturally located in front of the Easy Access Bar.

You push the bar with your thumb. When you release, it will jump back to the initial position.

When moving the Easy Access Bar up or down, you turn it around its own axis. Left or right movements shift it on the horizontal axis. In all four directions there are two contacts integrated in the Easy Access Bar. The profiled front of the bar gives your thumb enough grip to activate these keys. You feel a light resistance and hear a click when you have activated a key. Its function is generally executed only after you have released the Easy Access Bar. Only the keys with repeat function make exception.

In every direction, you can access two functions. After you release it, the Easy Access Bar returns to its home position. In its home position, it has no function.

Switches and Keys

JAWS as the screen reader software adapted for the BRAILLEX EL products obviously allows more functions than the 8 described above. Therefore, Papenmeier added two three-way toggle switches and two keys to the left and to the right of the Braille Display.

The layout is as follows (from left to right):

Left switch left key, Braille Display, right key, right switch

The eight possible positions of the Easy Access Bar change their meaning when you modify the position of the switches, and they also change when you press one of the keys while you activate the Easy Access Bar. The switches generally shift the meaning of the bar, while the keys both execute functions on their own and act together with the Easy Access Bar.

Standard Key Assignment for JAWS

Please note that the assignment of the Easy Access Bar (EAB) varies with the position of the toggle switches on the right and left side of the Braille Display! Please also observe that the key assignment is once again different if you press the left or right key while you push the Easy Access Bar.

Navigation

For normal screen navigation, please make sure that both switches are in central (neutral) position.

·         EAB one step left = move display to the left (read backwards).

·         EAB one step up = move display 1 line up.

·         EAB one step right = move display to the right (read forwards).

·         EAB one step down = move display 1 line down.

·         EAB two steps left = not assigned.

·         EAB two steps up = move display to top of window (title bar).

·         EAB two steps right = not assigned.

·         EAB two steps down = move display to bottom of window.

PC Mode

In PC mode, the Easy Access Bar allows you to navigate through an application. Bring the right switch into rear position (while the left switch remains in central position), and the EAB keys will emulate PC keyboard functions. Please note that all EAB functions remain unchanged if used in conjunction with one of the keys.

·         EAB one step left = left arrow

·         EAB one step up = up arrow

·         EAB one step right = right arrow

·         EAB one step down = down arrow

·         EAB two steps left = Shift+Tab

·         EAB two steps up = Esc

·         EAB two steps right = Tab

·         EAB two steps down = Enter

Combined Mode

The combined mode includes both screen navigation and cursor movement features. When you move the EAB up or down, the cursor is moved one line up or down as well (cf. PC mode). When you move the EAB to the right, the function is the same as in navigation mode if the text line is longer than the display is. The cursor remains at the original position. Once all the text has been displayed, another "read forwards" command will move both the cursor and the display to the next line. Pushing the EAB one step left corresponds to "read backwards" if you are within a long line of text. Otherwise, both cursor and display are moved one line up.

For the combined mode, bring the right switch into front position (while the left switch remains in central position).

·         EAB one step left = read backwards (within a long line), or: move cursor and display to previous line.

·         EAB one step up = move cursor and display to previous line.

·         EAB one step right = read forwards (within a long line), or: move cursor and display to next line.

·         EAB one step down = move cursor and display to next line.

Speech Mode

In addition to the automatic readout JAWS provides, you can obtain more speech functions with the Easy Access Bar. Push the left switch in rear position, and the right switch in central position.

·         EAB one step left = Say word.

·         EAB one step up = Say window title.

·         EAB one step right = Say line.

·         EAB one step down = Say bottom line of window.

·         EAB two steps left = Say selected text.

·         EAB two steps up = Say all.

·         EAB two steps right = Say default button.

·         EAB two steps down = Say text and attribute changes.

Cursor

When navigating across the screen with the Braille Display, you do not always take the cursor with you. You can return to the cursor position at any time:

·         Right key in front position = Move display to active cursor position.

You may toggle between JAWS cursor and PC cursor:

·         Right key in rear position = Toggle between JAWS cursor and PC cursor.

You can change the cursor sign shape (all 8-dots or just dots 7+8) on the fly:

·         Left key in front position = Toggle cursor presentation disabling (reveal character under cursor on/off).

Braille Presentation

When pressing the left key in front position, you access a number of Braille presentation functions with the Easy Access Bar: You can both toggle between 6 and 8-dot Braille presentation (in 6-dot mode, you disable dots 7 and 8), and toggle between text and attribute presentation. In attribute presentation mode, dots 1 through 4 show the text color, dots 5 through 8 the background color.

·         Left key in front position + EAB two steps left = Toggle between 6 and 8-dot Braille presentation

·         Left key in front position + EAB two steps right = Toggle between text and attribute presentation

Reveal Text Attributes

You can have the Braille Display reveal four different text attributes upon a keystroke. The Braille Display then underlines the corresponding portion of text with dots 7+8. You can select 4 attributes directly, or you can toggle between all available attributes. You can, of course, also disable this function.

·         Left key in rear position = Disable attribute display

·         Left key in rear position + EAB 1 step left = Reveal bold attribute.

·         Left key in rear position + EAB 1 step up = Reveal highlight attribute.

·         Left key in rear position + EAB 1 step right = Reveal italics attribute.

·         Left key in rear position + EAB 1 step down = Reveal underline attribute.

·         Left key in rear position + EAB 2 steps left = Toggle attribute display backwards.

·         Left key in rear position + EAB 2 steps right = Toggle attribute display forwards.

Routing

The mouse routing function works independently from the switch positions. In order to select text, hold the left key in rear position while you press a routing key:

Routing key = mouse routing.

Left key in front position + routing key = Select text.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

BRAILLEX 2D Screen

The topics listed below are for the Papenmeier BRAILLEX 2D Screen/s with JAWS.

BRAILLEX 2D Screen Function Key Layout

Standard Key Assignment for JAWS

This document is a brief review of the functions of JAWS in conjunction with the Papenmeier BRAILLEX 2D Screen display.

In order to use BRAILLEX 2D Screen with JAWS, you need to have software revision 8.03a, and connect the display to the computer via serial port (software driven device).

Note: For information about BRAILLEX 2D Screen hardware and detailed information regarding interfacing, refer to the BRAILLEX 2D Screen Reference Manual. For more information about JAWS, refer to your JAWS Quick Start Guide and the JAWS Online Help system.

BRAILLEX 2D Screen Function Key Layout

BRAILLEX 2D Screen has 13 function keys on its front panel.

Both to the left and to the right you find four small keys. They are marked with numbers which correspond to the dot numbers of an 8-dot Braille keyboard, or from the left to the right: [7],[3],[2],[1] [4],[5],[6],[8]. Towards the center, you then find two very large keys, the reading keys. The left one is marked with an up arrow [RB], the right one with a down arrow [RF]. In the center you find three more keys, two small ones and one broader one in the very center, these are marked, from left to right, [H], [S], and [E].

The whole function keyboard looks like follows:

7 3 2 1 RB H S E RF 4 5 6 8

Note: In the following, all BRAILLEX-2D Screen function keys are written in brackets.

Standard Key Assignment for JAWS

Navigation

·         [RB] = Read backwards - move display to the left.

·         [H] = Up - move display one line up.

·         [E] = Down - move display one line down.

·         [RF] = Read forwards - move display to the right.

·         [S]+[4] = Move display to top of window.

·         [S]+[8] = Move display to bottom of window. 

Cursor

When navigating across the screen with the Braille Display, you do not always take the cursor with you. You can return to the cursor position at any time:

CURSOR

[1] = Move display to active cursor position

You may toggle between JAWS cursor and PC cursor:

[S]+[1] = Toggle between JAWS cursor and PC cursor

You can change the cursor sign shape (all 8-dots or just dots 7+8) on the fly:

[S] = Toggle cursor presentation disabling (reveal character under cursor on/off)

Braille Presentation

When pressing the left key in front position, you access a number of Braille presentation functions with the Easy Access Bar: You can both toggle between 6 and 8-dot Braille presentation (in 6-dot mode, you disable dots 7 and 8), and toggle between text and attribute presentation. In attribute presentation mode, dots 1 through 4 show the text color, dots 5 through 8 the background color.

·         [S]+[2] = Toggle between 6 and 8-dot Braille presentation

·         [7]+[3] = Toggle between text and attribute presentation

Reveal Text Attributes

You can have the Braille Display reveal four different text attributes upon a keystroke. The Braille Display then underlines the corresponding portion of text with dots 7+8. You can, of course, also disable this function.

·         [3] = Disable attribute display 

·         [4] = Reveal bold attribute

·         [5] = Reveal highlight attribute

·         [6] = Reveal italics attribute

·         [8] = Reveal underline attribute

Routing

The mouse routing function works independently from the switch positions. In order to select text, hold the [S] key while you press a routing key:

·         Routing key = mouse routing

·         [S] + routing key = Select text

Modes

·         [7]+[2] = Toggle reading mode

·         [2] = Toggle PC mode

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

BrailleNote

Introduction and Setup

The BrailleNote is the latest notetaker from HumanWare Inc. and Pulse Data International and can be used with JAWS as a refreshable Braille display. To use the BrailleNote as a refreshable Braille display, follow the steps below:

Turn on the BrailleNote; the BrailleNote should display a message "resuming KeySoft main menu."

From the BrailleNote’s Main Menu, select the "terminal for screen reader option."

JAWS contains everything you will need to use your BrailleNote as a refreshable Braille display. When installing JAWS, choose the Custom installation option, and then select the BrailleNote as a refreshable Braille display.

After ensuring the BrailleNote is the default Braille display, connect the BrailleNote to your computer and launch the JAWS application.

BrailleNote Command Summary

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

BrailleNote Command Summary

Many of the BrailleNote’s commands parallel the command structure of HumanWare’s Braille Window. Below is a command summary for the BrailleNote to be used as a refreshable Braille display with JAWS:

Routing Touch Cursors (RTCs) Above Reading Cells

Above Cell 1 through Cell 32 (32 Cell Display) = Routes cursor to that location

Above Cell 1 through Cell 18 (18 Cell Display) = Routes cursor to that location

Front Panel Navigational Thumb Keys

Outer Left Thumb Key (F1) = 32 (or 18) characters BACK (Left)

Inner Left Thumb Key (F2) = Moves display UP one line (Prior)

Inner Right Thumb Key (F3) = Moves display DOWN one line (Next)

Outer Right Thumb Key (F4) = 32 (or 18) characters FORWARD (Right)

Thumb Key Combinations

Outer and inner left thumb keys F1+F2 = Braille Move Left

Outer and inner right thumb keys F3+F4 = Braille Move Right

Inner left and inner right thumb keys F2+F3 = JAWS Delete

Perkins-Style Braille Keys

The Perkins style keys are numbered in standard dot order: 7 3 2 1 9 4 5 6 8

The BrailleNote includes nine convenient Braille dot keys for quickly entering commands. They are arranged in the Perkins-style dot order as stated above.

Toggle or Cycling Commands

Dot 3 (Braille apostrophe) = Toggles Cursor: PC cursor, or JAWS cursor

Dot 2 (Braille comma) = Cycles Marking: bold, underline, italic, strikeout, all, off, highlight

Dot 1 (Braille letter a) = Cycles Mode: speech Output, attribute mode, line mode, structured mode

Dot 4 = Toggles whether active cursor follows Braille cursor

Dot 5 (Listed below under QWERTY key simulation)

Dot 6 (capital sign) = Toggles 6 or 8 dot Braille

QWERTY Keyboard Simulation

Dot 5 = Move to next field   (TAB)

Dots 4-5 = Reverse tab in menus or dialog boxes (SHIFT+TAB)

Dots 2-5 = Braille ALT+TAB

Dot 8 = Braille Enter

Dots 2-3-5-6 = Braille Toggle 8 Pixels Per Space

Dots 4-5-6 = Move To Next Non-Link Text

Movement Commands

Dots 1-2-3-9 = Top of file

Dots 4-5-6-9 = Bottom of file

Dots1-4-9 = Say Line

Dots 6-9 = Say Next Character

Dots 4-9 = Say Next Line

Dots 5-9 = Say Next Word

Dots 3-9 = Say Prior Character

Dots 1-9 = Say Prior Line

Dots 2-9 = Say Prior Word

Dots 2-5-9 = Say Word

Dots 3-6-9 = Say Character

Dots1-2-3-9 = Braille Top

Braille KEYPAD4+KEYPAD5+KEYPAD6+KEYPAD9 = Braille Bottom

Application and Window Functions

Dots 3-6 (Braille hyphen) = Toggle active cursor moves to Braille cursor

Dots 1-4-5 (Braille letter d) = Minimize all applications (desktop)

Dots 1-3-4-6 (Braille letter x) = Cut selected text to clipboard  (CTRL+X)

Dots 1-4 (Braille letter c) = Copy selected text to clipboard (CTRL+C)

Dots 1-2-3-4 (Braille letter p) = Paste from clipboard (CTRL+V)

Dots 1-3-4 (Braille letter m) =  Menu bar (activates ALT key)

Dots 1-2-3-5 (Braille letter r) =  Read whole document (say all)

Dots 2-3-4 (Braille letter s) = Start menu

Dots 1-2-3-6 (Braille letter v) = Braille verbosity

Dots 7 = ESC

SPACEBAR = Route Braille to Active Cursor

Dots 1-2-4-5 (Braille letter g) = Toggle Grade 2 Braille on/off

Dots 2-4-5-6 (Braille letter w) = Expand current Grade 2 word

Dots 2-4 = Run JAWS Manager

Dots 1-3 (Braille letter k) = Keyboard Help

Dots 2-4 5 (Braille letter  j) = JAWS Window

BrailleNote Keystrokes for Internet Explorer

Outer left and inner right thumb keys F1+F3 = Go Back to prior web page

Inner left and outer right thumb keys F2+F4 = Go Forward to next web page

Dots 1 2 4 (Braille letter  f) = SelectAFrame

Dots 1 2 3 (Braille letter  l) = SelectALink

BrailleNote Keystrokes for Outlook

Inner left and outer right thumb keys F2+F4 = Next Message

Outer left and inner right thumb keys F1+F3 = Previous Message

Dots 1 2 4 (Braille letter  f) = Go to Attachments List

Dots 1 2 3 (Braille letter  l) = Select a Link

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Voyager

JAWS support for the Optelec Braille Voyager display has been removed. To download drivers, help files, and key map files, or to obtain technical support for the Braille Voyager, please visit www.optelec.com.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Window

The topics listed below are for Braille Window with JAWS.

Selecting Serial or Parallel Port

Braille Window Command Summary

Introduction

What follows is a brief review of the special functions unique to the Braille Window and JAWS. Because the Braille Window uses command keys configured like a Perkins-style keyboard, it is able to use special mnemonic commands. With these easy-to-remember commands many JAWS functions that must ordinarily be entered from the computer keyboard can be controlled from the Braille Display. This increases your efficiency.

Note: For information about Braille Window hardware and detailed information regarding interfacing, refer to the Braille Window Interface Guide.

Selecting Serial or Parallel Port

The Braille Window allows you to connect to either your computer’s serial or parallel port.

Note: The Braille Window has an additional unidirectional parallel connector that you can use to connect your printer. However, some computers and printers require bi-directional parallel communications. If this is the case with your system, we recommend either using the serial port with the Braille Window or installing an additional parallel port, which costs less than $50.

To Change Ports:

1.    Make sure your Braille Window is turned OFF. The power switch is located in the left rear corner and should be in the DOWN position.

2.    Hold down the center thumb key on the front panel while switching the unit ON. Four options are presented on the Braille Display, CBP (parallel), CBS (serial), GUI (not used), and SLAVE (not used). To select the parallel interface, press the Touch Cursor button above CBP. To select serial interface, press the Touch Cursor button above CBS.

Braille Window Command Summary

The following key references relate to a Perkins-style Braille keyboard layout, which means that the left three keys are numbered from the inside out. The index finger of your left hand rests on dot 1, your middle finger on dot 2, and your ring finger on dot three. The three keys on the right follow the same pattern, which is index finger on dot 4, middle finger on dot 5, and ring finger on dot 6.

Status Cells

Cells One, Two, Three - Top Six Dots  Cursor pixel location

Cell Four - Top Six Dots  PC cursor (p), JAWS cursor (j), Invisible cursor (i) Press twice quickly when set to JAWS cursor. Mostly used for script writing

Cell Five - Top Six Dots  Structured mode (s), Line mode (l), speech Output mode (x)

Cells One through Four - Dots 7 & 8 Indicates whether text exists to left or right of cursor

Touch Cursors (TCs) Above Status Cells

Above Cell One Route JAWS cursor to PC cursor

Above Cell Two Route PC cursor to JAWS cursor

Above Cell Three Menu bar (Activates ALT Key)

Above Cell Four Start menu

Above Cell Five Minimize all applications (WINDOWS KEY+M)

Above Cell Six Right mouse button

Routing Touch Cursors (RTCs) Above Reading Cells

Above Cell 7 through Cell 45 (45 Cell Display) Routes cursor to that location

Above Cell 7 through Cell 85 (85 Cell Display) Routes cursor to that location

Front Panel Navigational Thumb Keys

Outer Left Thumb Key (F1) 40 (or 80) characters BACK (Left)

Inner Left Thumb Key (F2) Moves display UP one line (Prior)

Middle Thumb Key (F3) Routes braille cursor to active cursor

Inner Right Thumb Key (F4) Moves display DOWN one line (Next)

Outer Right Thumb Key (F5) 40 (or 80) characters FORWARD (Right)

Thumb Key Combinations

Up Left (F1 F2) Top of window

Down Right (F4 F5) Bottom of window

Up Middle (F1 F3) Mouse UP

Left Middle (F2 F3) Mouse LEFT

Middle Down (F3 F4) Mouse DOWN

Middle Right (F3 F5) Mouse RIGHT

Routing Right (Route F5) Describe font (Insert F)

JAWS Delete F2 F4

Braille Keys

Perkins-Style Braille Keys - In standard dot order - 3 2 1 4 5 6

The Braille Window includes six convenient braille dot keys for quickly entering commands. They are arranged in the Perkins-style dot order as stated above.

Note: You may notice that Dot 1 and Dot 3, when pressed in Keyboard Help (INSERT+1), read in reverse as " 3" and " 1," respectively. This may even become a more pronounced issue for you as you use certain Braille Window Dot key combinations throughout JAWS, and referencing the manual and on-line help. This is because when programmed, the JAWS key scripts were named from left to right as 1 through 6, as opposed to left to right in the Perkins key format of Dots 3 2 1 4 5 6. For the time being, you may need to make a mental note that for certain Dot key combination commands that include either Dot 1 or Dot 3, you may need to use the alternate key: swapping Dot 3 for Dot 1, and Dot 1 for Dot 3 in the key combination, to achieve the desired result. Below is a command listing that includes references to the correct Dot keys and Dot keys in combination, for your convenience.

Toggle or Cycling Commands

  ------------- -------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Perkins Key   Braille Equivalent   Result
  Dot 3         ‘ (apostrophe)       Toggles Cursor: PC cursor, or JAWS cursor
  Dot 2         , (comma)            Cycles Marking: bold, underline, italic , strikeout, all, off, highlight
  Dot 1         a                    Cycles Mode: speech Output, attribute mode, line mode, structured mode
  Dot 4                              Toggles whether active cursor follows braille cursor
  Dot 5                              (Listed below under QWERTY key simulation)
  Dot 6         (capital sign)       Toggles 6 or 8 dot braille
  ------------- -------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------

QWERTY Keyboard Simulation

  ------------- ----------------------- -------------------------------------------------- ----
  Perkins Key   Braille Equivalent      Result                                             > 
  Dot 5                                 Move to next field (TAB)                            
  Dots 4 5                              Reverse tab in menus or dialog boxes (SHIFT+TAB)    
  Dots 5 6      (letter sign)           Next document window (CTRL+TAB)                     
  Dots 4 5 6    (underline)             Previous document window SHIFT+CTRL+TAB)            
  Dots 2 5                              BrailleAltTab                                       
  Dots 4 6                              BrailleEnter                                        
  Dots 2 3 5    ! (exclamation point)   Screen sensitive HELP (INSERT+F1)                   
  ------------- ----------------------- -------------------------------------------------- ----

Movement Commands

  -------------- -------------------- ---------------------------
  Perkins Key    Braille Equivalent   Result
  Dots 2 3 4 5   t                    Top of window (TOP)
  Dots 1 2       b                    Bottom of window (BOTTOM)
  Dots 1 2 5     h                    Top of file (CTRL+HOME)
  Dots 1 5       e                    Bottom of file (CTRL+END)
  -------------- -------------------- ---------------------------

Application and Window Functions

  -------------- -------------------- ---------------------------------------------- ----
  Perkins Key    Braille Equivalent   Result                                         > 
  Dots 3 6       - (hyphen)           Toggle active cursor moves to braille cursor    
  Dots 1 4 5     d                    Minimize all applications (desktop)             
  Dots 1 3 4 6   x                    Cut selected text to clipboard CTRL+X)          
  Dots 1 4       c                    Copy selected text to clipboard (CTRL+C)        
  Dots 1 2 3 4   p                    Paste from clipboard (CTRL+V)                   
  Dots 1 3 4     m                    Menu bar (activates ALT key)                    
  Dots 1 2 3 5   r                    Read whole document (say all)                   
  Dots 2 3 4     s                    START menu                                      
  Dots 1 2 3 6   v                    Braille verbosity                               
  Dots 1 3 5 6   z                    ESCAPE                                          
  Dots 1 2 4 5   g                    Toggle Grade 2 Braille on/off                   
  Dots 2 4 5 6   w                    Expand current Grade 2 word                     
  Dots 2 4       i                    Run JAWS Manager                                
  Dots 1 3       k                    Keyboard Help                                   
  Dots 2 4 5     j                    JAWS Window                                     
  -------------- -------------------- ---------------------------------------------- ----

Braille Window Keystrokes for Internet Explorer 5

  ------------------------------- -----------------------------
  Braille F1 F4                   Go Back to prior web page
  Braille F2 F5                   Go Forward to next web page
  Dots 1 2 4 (Braille letter f)   Select a Frame
  Dots 1 2 3 (Braille letter l)   Select a Link
  ------------------------------- -----------------------------

Braille Window Keystrokes for Outlook

  ------------------------------- ------------------------
  Braille F1 F5                   Delete Message
  Braille F2 F5                   Next Message
  Braille F1 F4                   Previous Message
  Dots 1 2 4 (Braille letter f)   Go to Attachments List
  Dots 1 2 3 (Braille letter l)   Select a Link
  ------------------------------- ------------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Handy Tech - General Information

The following topics provide general information regarding Handy Tech braille display systems under JAWS.

JAWS for Windows With Handy Tech Braille Display Systems

General Handy Tech Braille Display Control Key Functions Under JAWS

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System

JAWS for Windows With Handy Tech Braille Display Systems 

JAWS contains everything you will need to use your Handy Tech display as a refreshable Braille display with JAWS. When installing JAWS, choose the Custom installation option, and then select Handy Tech as a refreshable Braille display.

All Handy Tech braille displays except for the Bookworm include the following eight control keys:
 7, 3, 2, 1, 4, 5, 6, 8 and two wide space bars <SPCL> and <SPCR>. Only the Braille Wave has only one space bar <SPC>.

Further, every display system has integrated cursor routing keys associated with each individual braille module. The cursor routing keys will be represented in these instructions by <CR>. They are used to position the cursor directly at a certain location within the text or to execute a left-mouse click.

The cursor routing keys associated with each of the status modules will be designated herein as <SCR>. If your model does not include any status modules, you can enable the status data display (see the instructions for your braille system) and then activate the cursor routing keys located directly above the status modules.

The Handy Tech braille display driver as of Version 3.x also includes an option for calling up a configuration dialog, which allows you to set up certain parameters for your Handy Tech braille display system. You can open this dialog by entering the key command <1+8> or <B12> on your braille system, or alternatively from the Start menu on your computer.

Please refer to the Help section or the manual for your specific braille display system for additional control key functions.

General Handy Tech Braille Display Control Key Functions Under JAWS 

  ------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Key Combination (DOTS)   Action
  7                        Activate the PC cursor.
  3                        Show the top of the active window or the beginning of the structured line.
  2                        Move the braille display to the left.
  1                        Move the braille cursor up and display the prior line of text.
  4                        Move the braille cursor down and display the next line of text.
  5                        Move the braille display to the right.
  6                        Show the bottom line of the window or the end of the structured line.
  8                        Move the JAWS cursor to the PC cursor.
  2+3                      Send a Home command to the active cursor.
  5+6                      Send an End command to the active cursor.
  7+8                      Cycle among Line, Structured, Attributes, and Speech Output modes.
  2+8                      Toggle the braille cursor shape between dots 7 and 8 and all dots.
  2+8                      Toggle between eight and six dot mode on a braille display.
  1+8                      Start Handy Tech braille display driver configuration dialog.
  4+8                      Toggle between 8 and unlimited pixels per space.
  5+8                      Activate the JAWS cursor.
  Routing                  Put the cursor at the current braille module.
  1+Routing                Allows you to select text using just the braille display.
  4+Routing                Allows you to select text using just the braille display.
  6+Routing                Describe the item that the braille cursor is currently located on.
  8+Routing                Simulate a right mouse click at the position of the braille cursor.
  SCR1                     Toggle between displaying characters or attributes.
  SCR2                     Indicate which text attributes should be displayed.
  SCR3                     When the active cursor moves, the braille cursor will follow.
  SCR4                     Move the active cursor when braille movement keys are pressed.
  2+4+5<j>                 Bring the JAWS Window into the foreground and give it focus.
  1+2+3+4+5+6              Bring the JAWS Window into the foreground and give it focus.
  1+4+5<d>                 Minimize all running applications and place the focus on the desktop.
  1+2+5<h>                 Say specific information related to the current item or control.
  4+6                      Same as pressing the TAB key on the keyboard.
  1+3                      Same as pressing SHIFT+TAB on the keyboard.
  1+2+4+5<g>               Toggle braille grade two translation on and off.
  1+3+4 <m>                Activate and then place the focus on the Menu bar.
  1+3+4<s>                 Activate and place focus on the Start menu.
  2+3+5                    Toggle between eight and six dot mode on a braille display.
  2+3+5+6                  Provide the user with a list of the names of all the System tray icons.
  1+3+5+6<z>               If pressed twice quickly, this keystroke will say the date.
  3+4                      Show or hide status section on the braille display.
  1+4                      Same as pressing CTRL+TAB on the keyboard.
  1+4+7                    Same as pressing CTRL+SHIFT+TAB on the keyboard.
  1+2+3                    Move to beginning of file.
  4+5+6                    Move to end of file.
  1+5<e>                   Same as pressing the ESC key on the keyboard.
  2+6                      Same as pressing the ENTER key on the keyboard.
  1+2                      Move the active cursor when braille movement keys are pressed.
  1+2+4                    When the active cursor moves, the braille cursor will follow.
  1+2+3+6<v>               Adjust braille verbosity.
  3+6+7                    Toggle speech interrupt for the braille device.
  3+6+7+8                  Read the taskbar window without moving the active cursor.
  ------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System 

 The Handy Tech braille display driver supports entering PC commands from the keys of your braille display. Alphanumerical characters are entered as braille dot combinations with the eight function keys. All the other keys of the PC keyboard are emulated by using so-called chords. A chord is a combination of certain braille dots together with one of the space keys on your braille display unit.

In order to activate/deactivate computer control from the braille display, enter the letter "capital B" using braille dots together with the SPACE key on your braille display: SPC+DOTS 1, 2, 7.

With computer control active on the braille display, pressing only DOT 7 simulates the pressing of the Backspace key. Pressing DOT 8 alone simulates the activation of the ENTER key. This function can also be disabled in the Handy Tech configuration dialog.

Additional input and control key functions for your computer from the braille system are also described in the JAWS Help section for your specific braille display system and in the User Manual.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Contacting Handy Tech

How to Reach Us

Please do not hesitate to contact Handy Tech staff if you have any questions about Handy Tech products in connection with the screenreader JAWS for Windows, at the following address, by phone, fax or e-mail.

Handy Tech Elektronik GmbH
 Brunnenstr. 10
 D-72160 Horb-Nordstetten
 Germany

Phone: +49 7451 5546-0
 Fax: +49 7451 5546-67
 E-mail: info@handytech.de
 Homepage: www.handytech.de/

 Our authorized dealers worldwide are also available to answer your questions. A complete list of Handy Tech dealers can be found at: www.handytech.de/en/normal/contact.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Handy Tech Bookworm

Control Keys of the Bookworm

JAWS Function Keys

Control Keys of the Bookworm

The "Forward" and "Backward" keys are located in the margins to the left and right of the braille modules. The "Backward" key is on the left side of the braille modules and will be represented below by the symbol <B>. The "Forward" key is across from the "Backward" key on the right side of the braille modules and is represented by <F>. The Escape key, represented as <ESC>, is the small function key on the left side, above the braille modules. On its right side is the <ENTER> key.

JAWS Function Keys

  ----------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Key Combination   Action
  B                 Display text to the left on the current line.
  F                 Display text to the right on the current line.
  ESC               Activate the PC Cursor.
  B+ESC             Toggle between eight and six dot mode on a braille display
  B+ENTER           Move the Braille cursor up and display the prior line of text.
  F+ENTER           Move the Braille cursor down and display the next line of text.
  F+ESC+ENTER       Send a Home command to the active cursor.
  B+ESC+F           Toggle the Braille cursor shape between either dots 7 and 8 or all dots.
  ESC+ENTER+F       Send an End command to the active cursor.
  ESC+F             Toggle between displaying characters or attributes.
  ESC+ENTER         Route the Braille cursor to the active cursor position.
  B+F               Same as pressing the TAB key on the keyboard.
  ENTER             Activate the JAWS Cursor.
  B+ENTER+F         Show the top of the active window or the beginning of the structured line.
  ----------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Handy Tech Braille Star 40, Braille Star 80, and Braillino

 General Information About Your Braille Display

JAWS Function Keys

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System

General Information About Your Braille Display

These three models are all braille displays from the same product family. Since their control key arrangements are almost the same, we have described them all together in this Help section.

On the front of the braille display, there are the two space keys, located in the center. To the right and left of the space keys are four function keys, respectively, which are also used to operate the computer. Behind these control keys is the line of ergonomically designed braille modules with integrated cursor routing keys. The cursor routing keys will be represented below by the symbol <CR>.

Under JAWS, the control keys are designated, from left to right, as follows:

7, 3, 2, 1 LEFT SPACE KEY, RIGHT SPACE KEY, 4, 5, 6, 8

To the left and right of the braille modules are located the two so-called Triple Action Keys. They are mounted in the housing such that they are flush with the braille modules. These keys can be activated at the top, in the center, and at the bottom.

The Triple Action Keys have the following functions: either the left or right Triple Action Key's (Up) position also serves as a reading key to move backward within the text, and will be referred to as <TLU> or <TRU>. Either the left or right Triple Action Key's (Down) position also serves as a reading key to move forward through the text, and are referred to as <TLD> or <TRD>. In the event of the right as well as the left Triple Action Key (Up) can be pressed, it is called <TU>. If alternatively the Triple Action Key left or right (Down) can be used, this is called <TD>.

The right Triple Action Key's Center position can have different functions and will be represented as <TRC>. The left Triple Action Key's Center position also has various functions and is represented by <TLC>.

The two space keys are distinguished as follows:

·         Left space key: <SPCL>

·         Right space key: <SPCR>

In some cases, the two space keys mean the same, and it is up to you to use either one. If this is the case, the two space keys will be designated as <SPC>.

The Braille Star 80 also includes a numbers block with 16 keys. The numbers block keys are arranged in four rows of four keys each. Every one of these keys can be customized with a specific function under JAWS.

The keys from <B9> through <B12> are the keys from the top left to the bottom left corner on the numbers block. <B14> is the bottom right corner key, with <B13> directly to the left of it.

The numerical digits <1> through <9> are arranged just as on the numbers block of a standard keyboard. <0> is located in the center of the bottom row between <B12> and <B13>. Pressing a numerical key has the same meaning as pressing the numerical keys on a computer keyboard.

JAWS Function Keys

This section contains a listing of the custom key combinations that you can use on your Braille Star 40, Braille Star 80, and the Braillino specifically. A list of the key combinations that are generally available on all braille displays is available to you in General Information Regarding Handy Tech Braille Display Systems Under JAWS.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Keys                              | Function                                                                                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| TU                                | Display text to the left on the current line.                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| TU/TD+CR                          | Say the font and point size at the routing key.                                         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| TD                                | Display text to the right on the current line.                                          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| TLC                               | Same as pressing SHIFT+TAB on the keyboard.                                             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| TRC                               | Same as pressing the TAB key on the keyboard.                                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| TLC+TRC                           | Same as pressing the ENTER key on the keyboard.                                         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SPCL                              | Show text to left of current braille display position and also drag the active cursor.  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SPCR                              | Show text to right of current braille display position and also drag the active cursor. |
|                                   |                                                                                         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| SPCL/SPCR+1 2 7                   | Turn braille input on and off.                                                          |
|                                   |                                                                                         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| B9                                | Cycle among Line, Structured, Attributes, and Speech Output modes.                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| B10                               | Toggle the Braille cursor shape between dots 7 and 8 and all dots.                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| B11                               | Toggle between 8- and 6-dot mode on a braille display.                                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| B12                               | Start Handy Tech braille display driver configuration dialog.                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| B13                               | Toggle between 8 and unlimited pixels per space.                                        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| B14                               | Activate the JAWS cursor.                                                               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System

General Notes

The Handy Tech Braille display driver supports entering computer commands from the keys of your braille system. Alphanumerical characters are entered as braille dot combinations. All the other keys of the computer keyboard are emulated by using so-called chords. A chord is a combination of certain braille dots together with one of the space keys on your braille display unit.

In order to activate/deactivate computer control from the braille display, enter the letter "capital B" using braille dots together with a space key on your braille display, or <SPC> plus DOTS 1, 2, and 7.

Notes on the representation of dot combinations in the following table:

·         Alternatives are indicated by a slash (/), for example SPCL/SPCR.

·         Key combinations are indicated by (+), for example CTRL+ALT+A.

·         Chord combinations are written with hyphens, for example, CHORD, Il means SPC with DOTS 1, 2, and 3.

Overview of Computer Functions

  ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------
  Computer Keys                       Emulated by
  Activate/deactivate braille input   SPC+1 2 7 (CHORD, B)
  BACKSPACE                           SPC+1 2 (CHORD, B)/P7
  DELETE                              SPC+4 5
  INSERT                              SPC+2 4 (CHORD, I)
  TAB                                 SPC+2 3 4 5 (CHORD, T)
  SHIFT+TAB                           SPC+2 3 4 5 7 (CHORD, T)
  ESC                                 SPC+1 5 (CHORD, E)/TLC
  SHIFT+ESC                           SPC+1 5 7 (CHORD, E)
  ENTER                               TRC/8
  ALT                                 SPC+TRC
  ALT+<command>                       ENTER+<command>
  ALT (for next command)              SPC+7 8
  ALT (activate/deactivate)           SPC+SPCR+7 8
  CTRL+<command>                      ESC+<command>
  CTRL (for next command)             SPC+3 6
  CTRL (activate/deactivate)          SPCL+SPCR+7 8
  ALTGr (for next command)            SPC+3 6 7 8
  ALTGr (activate/deactivate)         SPCL+SPCR+3 6 7 8
  SHIFT (for next command)            SPC+2, 3, 4 (CHORD, S)
  SHIFT (activate/deactivate)         SPC+2 3 4 7 (CHORD, S)/SPCL+SPCR+2
  Cursor up                           SPC+1
  Cursor down                         SPC+4
  Cursor left                         SPC+7
  Cursor Right                        SPC+8
  CTRL+Cursor left (previous word)    SPC+3
  CTRL+Cursor right (next word)       SPC+6
  Page up                             SPC+2
  Page down                           SPC+5
  Home                                SPC+1 3
  CTRL+Home (beginning of file)       SPC+1 2 3
  End                                 SPC+4 6
  CTRL+End (end of file)              SPC+4 5 6
  PAUSE key                           SPC+1 2 3 4 (CHORD, P)
  WIN key                             SPC+2 4 5 6 (CHORD, W )
  WIN key (for next command)          SPC+2 4 5 6 8
  WIN key (activate/deactivate)       SPCL+SPCR+2 4 5 6 8
  Application key                     SPC+2 4 5 6 7 (CHORD, W)
  JAWS key (for next command)         SPC+2 3 4 8
  JAWS key (activate/deactivate)      SPCL+SPCR+2 3 4 8
  Space                               SPC
  Function keys F1 ... F12            SPC+CR1 ... CR12
  ----------------------------------- ------------------------------------

As an alternative to the key combinations listed above for ALT and CTRL, you can also enter the following key combinations on your braille system instead:

·         <ESC> corresponds to CTRL (for example, the command <ESC+A> can be used to "mark all")

·         <ENTER> corresponds to ALT (e.g., <ENTER+F> activates the File menu within an application; <SPC+ENTER> places the focus on the menu bar)

Examples

o   If you want to activate the menu bar:
 ENTER <SPC+TRC> on the Braille system. You can then navigate through the menu bar with the cursor keys. <SPC+8> means you move to the next menu on the right, while <SPC+7> will move to the previous menu to the left. By entering <SPC+4> or <SPC+1> you can wander up or down through the menu.

o   If you want to mark text from one position to the end of the document:
 Place the cursor at the beginning of the text to be marked by pressing the appropriate cursor routing key, then enter <SPC+2 3 4> (CHORD, S), which enables the SHIFT key for the next command. Then enter <SPC+4 5 6> (end of file), which will mark the text to the end of this file.

o   If you want to mark one word:
 Activate SHIFT by entering <SPCL+SPCR+2 3 4>. The SHIFT key will remain engaged. Then initiate the CTRL key, which will also remain engaged, by entering <SPCL+SPCR+3 6> and navigate to the left or to the right by using the cursor commands <SPC+7> or <SPC+8> in order to mark the desired words. Careful! Don't forget to deactivate the SHIFT and CTRL keys again.

o   If you want to activate the Task Manager:
 Engage the CTRL key <TLC> on your Braille system and hold it down. This will activate the control key. Then enter the key combination for SHIFT+ESCAPE <SPC+1 5 7> (CHORD, E). The Task-Manager will open.
 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Handy Tech Braille Wave

Control Keys of the Braille Wave

JAWS Function Keys

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System

Control Keys of the Braille Wave

There are three control keys on the front of your Braille Wave. From left to right, these are the following keys: the ESC key, represented herein as <ESC>; the wide space bar <SPC>; and the ENTER key, represented as <ENTER>. Behind these keys you will find a row of 8 keys, arranged in two groups of four. These are the control keys for operating a computer when the Braille Wave is used in computer mode. The eight keys are designated as follows, from left to right:

7, 3, 2, 1, 4, 5, 6, 8

Behind these keys are the braille modules, which are slightly lower. The Braille Wave includes 40 ergonomically designed braille modules, each with an integrated cursor routing key (which are represented below by <CR>).

The reading key that is used for moving backward through text is located to the left of the braille cells and will be represented below by <L>. The reading key for moving forward is on the right side of the braille cells and will be represented below by <R>. The two reading keys are mounted in the housing such that they are flush with the braille cells.

JAWS Function Keys

This section contains a listing of the custom key combinations that you can use on your Braille Wave specifically. A list of the key combinations that are generally available on all braille displays is available to you in General Information Regarding Handy Tech Braille Display Systems Under JAWS.

  --------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  Keys            Function
  L               Display text to the left on the current line.
  R               Display text to the right on the current line.
  ESC             Same as pressing SHIFT+TAB on the keyboard
  ENTER           Same as pressing the TAB key on the keyboard.
  ESC+SPC+ENTER   Show or hide status section on the braille display.
  ESC+ENTER       Same as pressing the ENTER key on the keyboard.
  SPC+1 2 7       Turn braille input on and off.
  L/R+CR          Say the font and point size at the routing key.
  --------------- -----------------------------------------------------

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System 

General Notes

The Handy Tech braille display driver supports entering computer commands from the keys of your braille system. Alphanumerical characters are entered as braille dot combinations.

All the other keys of the computer keyboard are emulated by using so-called chords. A chord is a combination of certain braille dots together with the space bar on your Braille Wave.

In order to activate/deactivate computer control from the braille display, enter the letter "capital B" using braille dots together with the space bar, <SPC+1 2 7 >, on your Braille Wave.

Notes on the representation of dot combinations in the following table:

·         Key combinations are indicated by (+), for example CTRL+ALT+A.

·         Chord combinations are written with hyphens, for example, CHORD, L means SPC plus DOTS 1, 2, and 3.

  ----------------------------------- ---------------------------
  Computer Keys                       Emulated by
  Activate/deactivate braille input   SPC+1 2 7 (CHORD, B)
  ENTER                               ENTER / B8
  Backspace                           SPC+1 2 (CHORD, B) or B1
  Delete                              SPC+4 5
  Insert                              SPC+2 4 (CHORD, I)
  ALT                                 SPC+ENTER
  ALT+<command>                       ENTER+<command>
  ALT (for next command)              SPC+7 8
  TAB                                 SPC +2 3 4 5 (CHORD, T)
  SHIFT+TAB                           SPC+2 3 4 5 7 (CHORD, T)
  Escape                              SPC+1 5 (CHORD, E) or ESC
  SHIFT+Escape                        SPC+1 5 7 (CHORD, E)
  CTRL+<command>                      ESC+<command>
  CTRL (for next command)             SPC+3 6
  ALTGr (for next command)            SPC+3 6 7 8
  SHIFT (for next command)            SPC+2 3 4 (CHORD, S)
  SHIFT (activate/deactivate)         SPC+2 3 4 7 (CHORD, S)
  Cursor up                           SPC+1
  Cursor down                         SPC+4
  Cursor left                         SPC+7
  Cursor right                        SPC+8
  Page up                             SPC+2
  Page down                           SPC+5
  Home                                SPC+1 3
  End                                 SPC+4 6
  CTRL+Cursor left (previous word)    SPC+3
  CTRL+Cursor right (next word)       SPC+6
  CTRL+Home (beginning of file)       SPC+1 2 3
  CTRL+End (end of file)              SPC+4 5 6
  WIN key                             SPC+2 4 5 6 (CHORD, W )
  WIN key (for next command)          SPC+2 4 5 6 8
  Application key                     SPC+2 4 5 6 7 (CHORD, W)
  PAUSE key                           SPC+1 2 3 4 (CHORD, P)
  JAWS key (for next command)         SPC+2 3 4 8
  Space                               SPC
  Function keys F1 through F12        SPC+CR1 through CR12
  ----------------------------------- ---------------------------

Examples

·         If you want to activate the menu bar:
 ENTER <SPC+ENTER> on the Braille Wave. You can then navigate through the menu bar with the cursor keys. <SPC+8> means you move to the next menu on the right, while <SPC+7> will move to the previous menu to the left. By entering <SPC+4> or <SPC+1> you can wander up or down through the menu.

·         If you want to mark text from one position to the end of the document:
 Place the cursor at the beginning of the text to be marked by pressing the appropriate cursor routing key, then enter <SPC+2 3 4> (CHORD, S), which enables the SHIFT key for the next command. Then enter <SPC+4 5 6> (end of file), which will mark the text to the end of this file.

·         If you want to mark one word:
 Activate SHIFT by entering <SPC+2 3 4 7> (CHORD, S). The SHIFT key will remain engaged. Then initiate the CTRL key, <ESC>, keep this key depressed, and navigate with the cursor keys <SPC+7> or <SPC+8> in order to mark the desired words. Careful! Do not forget to deactivate the SHIFT and CTRL keys again.

·         If you want to activate the Task Manager:
 Engage the CTRL key <ESC> on your braille system and hold it down. This will activate the control key. Then enter the key combination for SHIFT+ESC <SPC+1 5 7> (CHORD, E). The Task-Manager will open.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Handy Tech Modular Evolution

General Information About Your Modular Evolution

JAWS Function Keys

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System

General Information About Your Modular Evolution

In this section, we provide a brief overview of your Modular Evolution system with integrated ATC technology. There are two long keys on the front face of the housing that are designed to be activated by your thumbs. These two keys, also called thumb keys, are used as navigation keys, and they also serve as space keys while entering text. The left thumb key navigates to the left and/or up within the text. It will be represented in these instructions by the symbol <L>. The right thumb key navigates to the right and/or down within the text. It will be represented by <R>. When computer-control from the braille system's keys is engaged, the two thumb keys have the function of the space key.
 
 If only one specific one of these two space keys needs to be used in any of the key combinations listed below, they will be distinguished as follows:

·         Left space key: <L>

·         Right space key: <R>

Behind the two thumb keys are 8 function keys, which are also used for the purpose of entering braille dots. The function keys are designated as B1 through B8, from left to right. While in braille input mode, these eight function keys correspond to braille dots as follows, in sequence from left to right:

7 3 2 1 4 5 6 8

This means, for example, that B1 corresponds to DOT 7, B4 corresponds to DOT 1, etc.

Behind the control keys is a line of either 64 or 88 ergonomic braille modules with integrated cursor routing keys. The cursor routing keys, which will be referred to herein as CR keys, make it possible to place the cursor directly at the text position of the associated braille element, or to simulate a mouse click, or to display status data.
 
 To the left and right of the braille modules are located the two so-called Triple Action Keys. They are mounted in the housing such that they are flush with the braille modules. These keys can be activated at the top, in the center, and at the bottom.

The Triple Action Keys have the following functions:

Either the left or right Triple Action Key's Up position serves as a reading key to move backward within the text, and will be referred to as <TLU> or <TRU> below. Either the left or right Triple Action Key's Down position serves as a reading key to move forward through the text, and is referred to as <TLD> or <TRD> below. The right Triple Action Key's Center position will be represented as <TRC>. The left Triple Action Key's Center position will be represented as <TLC>.

Above the braille modules is the Modular Evolution's base for attaching a modular keyboard or a modular braille keyboard.

If your model is the Modular Evolution 88, a modular numbers block can also be snapped on to either the left or right side of the unit. The 16 keys on the modular numbers block are arranged in four rows of four keys each. Their designations are as follows:
 

  ------------ ----- ----- --- -----
  Top row      B9    1     2   3
  Second row   B10   4     5   6
  Third row    B11   7     8   9
  Bottom row   B12   B13   0   B14
  ------------ ----- ----- --- -----

The numerical keys of this modular numbers block are associated with the digits one through zero. The remaining keys, <B9> through <B14>, are available for operating JAWS and have the functions described below.

JAWS Function Keys

This section contains a listing of the custom key combinations that you can use on your Modular Evolution specifically. A list of the key combinations that are generally available on all braille displays is available to you in General Information Regarding Handy Tech Braille Display Systems Under JAWS.
 

  -------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------
  Keys                       Function
  TLU / TRU                  Display text to the left on the current line.
  TLU / TRU / TLD / TRD+CR   Say the font and point size at the routing key.
  TLD / TRD                  Display text to the right on the current line.
  TLC                        Same as pressing SHIFT+TAB on the keyboard.
  TRC                        Same as pressing the TAB key on the keyboard.
  TLC+TRC                    Same as pressing the ENTER key on the keyboard.
  L                          Display text to the left on the current line.
  R                          Display text to the right on the current line.
  L/R+B1+B3+B4               Turn braille input on and off.
  L+R                        Show or hide status section on the braille display.
  L/R+B1+B4                  Turn ATC on and off.
  L/R+B2+B3+B4               Enables or disables the ATC reading protocol.
  B9                         Cycle among Line, Structured, Attributes, and Speech Output modes.
  B10                        Toggle the Braille cursor shape between dots 7 and 8 and all dots.
  B11                        Toggle between eight and six dot mode on a Braille display.
  B12                        Start Handy Tech Braille display driver configuration dialog.
  B13                        Toggle between 8 and unlimited pixels per space.
  B14                        Activate the JAWS cursor.
  -------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System

General Notes

The Handy Tech braille display driver supports entering computer commands from the keys of your braille system. Alphanumerical characters are entered as braille dot combinations. For this purpose, the function keys on your braille system correspond to braille dots as follows:

·         B1 corresponds to DOT 7

·         B2 corresponds to DOT 3

·         B3 corresponds to DOT 2

·         B4 corresponds to DOT 1

·         B5 corresponds to DOT 4

·         B6 corresponds to DOT 5

·         B7 corresponds to DOT 6

·         B8 corresponds to DOT 8

This means that, moving from left to right, the function keys are arranged as braille dots in the following sequence:

7, 3, 2, 1, 4, 5, 6, 8

All the other keys of the computer keyboard are emulated by using so-called chords. A chord is a combination of certain braille dots together with one of the thumb keys on your braille display unit.

In order to activate/deactivate computer control from the braille display, enter the letter "capital B" using braille dots together with one of the thumb keys on your braille display. This is represented as <L/R+1 2 7> (DOTS 1, 2, 7).

Notes on the representation of dot combinations in the following table:

·         Alternatives are indicated by a slash (/), for example L/R.

·         Key combinations are indicated by (+), for example CTRL+ALT+A.

·         Chord combinations are written with hyphens, for example, CHORD+L means <L/R+1 2 3>.

  ----------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  Computer Keys                       Emulated by
  Activate/deactivate braille input   L/R+1 2 7 (CHORD, B)
  Backspace                           L/R+1 2 or 7
  Delete                              L/R+4 5
  Insert                              L/R+2 4 (CHORD, I)
  ALT                                 TRC+L/R
  ALT+<command>                       TRC+<command>
  ENTER                               8 or TLC+TRC
  CTRL+<command>                      TLC+<command>
  TAB                                 L/R+2 3 4 5 (CHORD, T)
  SHIFT+TAB                           L/R+2 3 4 5 7 (CHORD, T)
  CTRL+TAB                            TLC+L+2 3 4 5
  CTRL+SHIFT+TAB                      TLC+L+2 3 4 5 7
  ESC                                 L/R+1 5 or TLC
  SHIFT+ESC                           L/R+1 5 7
  CTRL+SHIFT+ESC                      TLC+L/R+1 5 7
  SHIFT+<command>                     TLC+L/R+2 3 4, <command>
  permanent SHIFT on or off           L+2 3 4 7
  Cursor keys                         UP: L/R+1, LEFT: L/R+7, DOWN: L/R+4, RIGHT: L/R+8
  Previous word (CTRL+Cursor left)    L/R+3
  Next word (CTRL+Cursor right)       L/R+6
  PAGE UP                             L/R+2
  PAGE DOWN                           L/R+5
  CTRL+PAGE UP                        TLC+L/R+2
  CTRL+PAGE DOWN                      TLC+L/R+5
  HOME                                L/R+1 3
  END                                 L/R+4 6
  CTRL+HOME                           L/R+1 2 3
  CTRL+END                            L/R+4 5 6
  Function keys F1 through F12        L/R+CR1 through CR12
  WIN key                             L/R+2 4 5 6
  Application key                     L/R+2 4 5 6 7
  WIN key+<command>                   L/R+2 4 5 6 8, <command>
  PAUSE Taste                         L/R+1 2 3 4
  Space                               L/R
  JAWS key+<command>                  L/R+2 3 4 8, <command>
  ----------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------

Examples

·         If you want to activate the menu bar:
 ENTER <L/R+TRC> on the braille system. You can then navigate through the menu bar with the cursor keys. <L/R+8> means you move to the next menu on the right, while <L/R+7> will move to the previous menu to the left. By entering <L/R+4> or <L/R+1> you can wander up or down through the menu.

·         If you want to mark text from one position to the end of the document:
 Place the cursor at the beginning of the text to be marked by pressing the appropriate cursor routing key, then enter <L/R+2 3 4> (CHORD, S), which enables the SHIFT key for the next command. Then enter <L/R +4 5 6> (end of file), which will mark the text to the end of this file.

·         If you want to mark one word:
 Activate SHIFT by entering <L+R+2 3 4>. The SHIFT key will remain engaged. Then initiate the CTRL key, which will also remain engaged, by entering <L+R+3 6> and navigate to the left or to the right by using the cursor commands <L/R+7> or <L/R+8> in order to mark the desired words. Careful! Don't forget to deactivate the SHIFT and CTRL keys again.

·         If you want to activate the Task Manager:
 Engage the CTRL key <TLC> on your braille system and hold it down. This will activate the control key. Then enter the key combination for SHIFT+ ESC <L/R+1 5 7> (CHORD, E). The Task-Manager will open.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Handy Tech Modular System

Control Keys of the Modular System

JAWS Function Keys

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System

Control Keys of the Modular System

There are ten control keys that are located in front of the braille modules of your Modular System. Eight keys are designated as B1 through B8 in sequence from left to right, plus there are two long keys on the front face of the braille display that are designed to be activated by your thumbs. These two keys move the entire display on braille cells to the left or right and will be represented by the symbols <L> and <R> in these instructions.

Your braille display uses the first four braille cells on the left side of the braille line to display status information. There is one cursor routing key located directly above each of these four status modules, which will be represented in the following instructions by <SCR> for Status Cursor Routing keys numbered one through four from left to right. Next to these four braille cells to the right, with one blank space braille cell in between, are 80 braille cells with integrated cursor routing keys for displaying text in braille. The cursor routing keys will be represented by <CR>.

Your braille display also includes a numbers block containing 16 keys. The numbers block is arranged in 4 rows of 4 keys each. Every one of these keys can be customized with a specific function under JAWS.

The designations of the numbers block keys are as follows: <B9> through <B12> are the keys from the top left to the bottom left corner on the numbers block. <B14> is the bottom right corner key, with <B13> directly to the left of it.

The numerical digits <1> through <9> are arranged just as on the numbers block of a standard keyboard. <0> is located in the center of the bottom row between <B12> and <B13>. Pressing a numerical key has the same meaning as pressing the numerical keys on a computer keyboard.

JAWS Function Keys

This section contains a listing of the custom key combinations that you can use on your Modular System specifically. A list of the key combinations that are generally available on all braille displays is available to you in General Information Regarding Handy Tech Braille Display Systems Under JAWS.

  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------
  Keys              Function
  R                 Display text to the right on the current line.
  L                 Display text to the left on the current line.
  L+B1+B2+B3+B4     Display text to the left on the current line.
  R+B5+B6+B7+B8     Display text to the right on the current line.
  L+R+B1+B2+B3+B4   Move the braille cursor up and display the prior line of text.
  L+R+B5+B6+B7+B8   Move the braille cursor down and display the next line of text.
  L/R+CR            Say the font and point size at the routing key.
  L/R+B1+B3+B4      Turn braille input on and off.
  B9                Cycle among Line, Structured, Attributes, and Speech Output modes.
  B10               Toggle the Braille cursor shape between dots 7 and 8 and all dots.
  B11               Toggle between eight and six dot mode on a braille display.
  B12               Start Handy Tech braille display driver configuration dialog.
  B13               Toggle between 8 and unlimited pixels per space.
  B14               Activate the JAWS cursor.
  ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------

Controlling the Computer from the Braille System 

General Notes

The Handy Tech braille display driver supports entering computer commands from the keys of your braille system. Alphanumerical characters are entered as braille dot combinations. For this purpose, the function keys on your braille system correspond to braille dots as follows:

·         B1 corresponds to DOT 7

·         B2 corresponds to DOT 3

·         B3 corresponds to DOT 2

·         B4 corresponds to DOT 1

·         B5 corresponds to DOT 4

·         B6 corresponds to DOT 5

·         B7 corresponds to DOT 6

·         B8 corresponds to DOT 8

This means that, moving from left to right, the function keys are arranged as braille dots in the following sequence:

7, 3, 2, 1, 4, 5, 6, 8

All the other keys of the computer keyboard are emulated by using so-called chords. A chord is a combination of certain braille dots together with the left or right thumb key on your braille display unit.

In order to activate/deactivate computer control from the braille display, enter the letter "capital B" using braille dots together with one of the thumb keys on your braille display. This is represented as <L/R+1 2 7> (DOTS 1, 2, 7).

Notes on the representation of dot combinations in the following table:

·         Alternatives are indicated by a slash (/), for example L/R.

·         Key combinations are indicated by (+), for example CTRL+ALT+A.

·         Chord combinations are written with hyphens, for example, CHORD, L means one of the thumb keys with B2+B3+B4 <L/R+1 2 3>.

+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Computer Keys                      | Emulated by                               |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Activate/deactivate braille input  | L/R+1 2 7 (CHORD, B)                      |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  BACKSPACE                         | L/R+1 2 (CHORD, B)/7                      |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  DELETE                            | L/R+4+5                                   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  INSERT                            | L/R+2+4 (CHORD, I)                        |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  TAB                               | L/R+2 3 4 5 (CHORD, T)                    |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  SHIFT-TAB                         | L/R+2 3 4 5 7 (CHORD, T)                  |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  ESC                               | L/R+1 5 (CHORD, E)                        |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  SHIFT+ESC                         | L/R+1 5 7 (CHORD, E)                      |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  ENTER                             | 8 (only if fast braille input is enabled) |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  ALT (for next command)            | L/R+7 8                                   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  ALT (activate/deactivate)         | L+R+7 8                                   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CTRL (for next command)           | L/R+3 6                                   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CTRL (activate/deactivate)        | L+R+3 6                                   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  ALTGr (for next command)          | L/R+3 6 7 8                               |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  ALTGr (activate/deactivate)       | L/R+3 6 7 8                               |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  SHIFT (for next command)          | L/R+2 3 4 (CHORD, S)                      |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  SHIFT (activate/deactivate)       | L/R+2 3 4 7 (CHORD, S) or L+R+2 3 4       |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  Cursor up                         | L/R+1                                     |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  Cursor down                       | L/R+4                                     |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  Cursor left                       | L/R+7                                     |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  Cursor right                      | L/R+8                                     |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CTRL+ Cursor left (previous word) | L/R+3                                     |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CTRL+Cursor right (next word)     | L/R+6                                     |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  PAGE UP                           | L/R+2                                     |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| PAGE DOWN                          | L/R+5                                     |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| HOME                               | L/R+1 3                                   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CTRL+ HOME (beginning of file)    | L/R+1 2 3                                 |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  End                               | L/R+4 6                                   |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  CTRL+END (end of file)            | L/R+4 5 6                                 |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  PAUSE key                         | L/R+1 2 3 4 (CHORD, P)                    |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  WIN key                           | L/R+2+4+5+6 (CHORD, W)                    |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  WIN key (for next command)        | L/R+2 4 5 6 8                             |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  WIN key (activate/deactivate)     | L+R+2+4+5+6+8                             |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  Application key                   | L/R+2 4 5 6 7 (CHORD, W)                  |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  JAWS key (for next command)       | L/R+2 3 4 8                               |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  JAWS key (activate/deactivate)    | L+R+2 3 4 8                               |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
|  SPACE                             | L/R                                       |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Function keys F1 through F12       | L/R+CR1 through CR12                      |
+------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------+

Examples

·         If you want to mark text from one position to the end of the document:
 Place the cursor at the beginning of the text to be marked by pressing the appropriate cursor routing key, then enter <L/R+B2+B3+B5> (CHORD, S), which enables the SHIFT key for the next command. Then enter <L/R +B5+B6+B7> (end of file), which will mark the text to the end of this file.

·         If you want to mark one word:
 Activate SHIFT by entering <L+R+2 3 4>. The SHIFT key will remain engaged. Then initiate the CTRL key, which will also remain engaged, by entering <L+R+B2+B7> and navigate to the left or to the right by using the cursor commands <L/R+B1> or <L/R+B8> in order to mark the desired words.

·         If you want to activate the Task Manager:
 Engage the CTRL key, applicable to the next command you input, by entering <L/R+3 6> on your braille system, then enter the key combination meaning SHIFT+ESC <L/R+1 5 7>. The Task Manager will open.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

RBT/Rabbit 40

The topics listed below are for RBT/Rabbit 40 and JAWS.

Keyboard Commands

JAWS/RBT 40 Quick Reference Guide

Hardware Installation and Configuration

JAWS for Windows Software Installation

Introduction

The RBT 40 (also known as the Rabbit) provides lightweight, powerful and efficient access to Microsoft Windows when used with JAWS. Custom scripts and keyboard profiles make the Rabbit an excellent choice for use with JAWS. Designed to make commands simple to remember, the six command keys provide easy access to all the most popular Braille and Windows functions.

Weighing only two pounds and providing up to 100 hours of battery life, the Rabbit is perfect for the on-the-go user. The reversible Braille cell provides the best ergonomic use as well. The Rabbit can be place under a keyboard or laptop in the same way as a traditional Braille Display, or rotated and placed against the front of the keyboard or laptop.

Using JAWS with the RBT 40

This section describes the front panel keys assigned to the RBT 40 that are used with JAWS. The commands are shown in two lists, one list by related key presses, the other in alphabetical order by function. Refer to these lists to learn how to use the RBT 40 with JAWS. Also note that JAWS allows you to easily change keyboard assignments for combinations of key presses on the RBT 40. Refer to Keyboard Manager for more information about adding or changing functions assigned to the Braille keys.

Keyboard Commands

Most general navigation commands are assigned to single and two button commands from the Braille Display. Some advanced commands are assigned to mnemonic commands using the six dots on the Braille Display to simulate a character. For example, when you are instructed to enter an f on the Braille Display, press dots 1+2+4 simultaneously. This section lists the commands grouped by keystroke in single dot commands, two-dot commands, commands with the routing switches and commands using alphabetical mnemonics.

Single dot commands

Dot 1 = Up Line. Move the display up one line on the screen. When in JAWS Cursor mode, the display will move up one line on the window. When in PC Cursor mode, the cursor will move up one line in the document.

Dot 2 = Previous Display. Move the display 40 characters to the left.

Dot 3 = Down Line. Move the display down one line on the screen. When in JAWS Cursor mode, the display will move down one line on the window. When in PC Cursor mode, the cursor will move down one line in the document.

Dot 4 = JAWS/PC Cursor. Toggles JAWS between PC Cursor mode and JAWS Cursor mode.

Dot 5 = Advance Display. Move the display 40 characters to the right.

Dot 6 = Line/Structured Mode. Toggle JAWS between Line mode and Structured mode.

Two-Dot Commands

Dots 1+2 = Top Line. Moves the display to the top line. In PC Cursor mode, the display moves to the first line of the document. In JAWS Cursor mode, the display moves to the first line on the screen.

Dots 2+3 = Bottom Line. Moves the display to the bottom line. In PC Cursor mode, the display moves to the last line of the document. In JAWS Cursor mode, the display moves to the last line on the screen.

Dots 4+5 = Shift Tab. Performs a Windows SHIFT+TAB keystroke.

Dots 5+6 = Tab. Performs a Windows TAB keystroke.

Dots 4+5+6 = Alt Tab. Performs a Windows ALT+TAB keystroke

Dots 1+3 = Keyboard Help. Toggles Keyboard Help on/off.

Dots 4+6 = Braille Marking. Rotates through the Braille marking settings.

Dots 1+4 = Attributes. Toggles between Attribute and Character display.

Dots 2+5 = Escape. Performs a Windows ESC keystroke

Dots 3+6 = 6/8-Dot Display. Toggles between 6-dot and 8-dot display.

Dots 1+5 = Enter. Performs a Windows ENTER keystroke.

Dots 2+4 = Route JAWS to PC. Routes the JAWS cursor to the PC cursor.

Dots 3+4 = Route PC to JAWS. Routes the PC cursor to the JAWS cursor.

Dots 2+6 = Cursor Tracking. Toggle Braille cursor tracking. When on, the Braille Display follows the active cursor (JAWS cursor or PC cursor). When off, the Braille Display does not follow the active cursor.

Dots 3+5 = Move active cursor. When toggled on, Braille movements bring the active cursor (JAWS cursor or PC cursor) with it. When off, the active cursor does not move with the Braille Display.

Routing Commands

Routing = Route. Route cursor.

Routing+dot 1 = Font. Announce font at position.

Routing+dot 3 = Select Text. Selects text with the Braille Display.

Alphabetical Commands

A = Up Line. Move the display up one line on the screen. When in JAWS Cursor mode, the display will move up one line on the window. When in PC Cursor mode, the cursor will move up one line in the document.

B = Top Line. Moves the display to the top line. In PC Cursor mode, the display moves to the first line of the document. In JAWS cursor mode, the display moves to the first line on the screen.

C = Character/Attributes. Toggles between Attribute and Character display.

D = Read Dialog Box. Reads the dialog box in Tab order.

E = Enter. Performs a Windows ESC keystroke.

F = Find. Performs the JAWS Find command. Searches for text in the active window.

G = Go to Menu Bar. Activates the Menu bar of the current application.

H = Hot Key Help. Provides Hot Key Help.

I = Route JAWS to PC. Routes the JAWS cursor to the PC cursor.

J = JAWS Menu. Activates the JAWS menu.

K = Keyboard Help. Toggles Keyboard Help on/off.

L = Unassigned. This key press is not assigned to a function.

M = Minimize All. Minimizes all applications and places the PC cursor on the Windows desktop.

N = Next Document. Performs the Windows CTRL+TAB keystroke. In most applications, this will move you to the next open document.

O = Open List Box. Performs the Windows ALT+DOWN ARROW keystroke. In most applications, this will cause a list box to display more than one option on the screen.

P = Previous Document. Performs the Windows CTRL+SHIFT+TAB keystroke. In most applications, this will move you to the previous open document.

Q = Unavailable. This key press is not available.

R = Route Braille to Cursor. Routes the Braille Display to the active cursor.

S = Start Menu. Activates the Windows Start menu.

T = Say Window Title. Announce the current window title with speech.

U = Unassigned. This key press is not assigned to a function.

V = Braille Verbosity. Changes the level of verbosity used with the Braille Display.

W = Windows Key Help. Provides help about commands for Windows keystrokes.

X = Braille Marking Off. Turns all Braille marking off.

Y = Unavailable. This key press is not available.

Z = Say Selected Text. Announces selected text from the current document.

0 = Unlimited Pixels per Space. Sets an unlimited number of pixels per space. This allows large spaces to be shown as a single space on the display.

Numeric Commands

1 = Previous Display. Moves the display 40 characters to the left.

2 = Bottom Line. Moves the display to the bottom line. In PC Cursor mode, the display moves to the last line of the document. In JAWS cursor mode, the display moves to the last line on the screen.

3 = Escape. Performs a Windows ESC keystroke.

4 = Unassigned. This key press is not assigned to a function.

5 = Braille Cursor Tracking. Toggle Braille cursor tracking. When on, the Braille Display follows the active cursor (JAWS cursor or PC cursor). When off, the Braille Display does not follow the active cursor.

6 = 6/8-Dot Display. Toggles between 6-dot and 8-dot display.

7 = Graphics Labeler. Performs the command to label graphics.

8 = Eight Pixels per Space. Sets 8 pixels per space. This allows large spaces to be shown as multiple spaces on the Braille Display.

9 = Move Active Cursor. When toggled on, Braille movements will bring the active cursor (JAWS cursor or PC cursor) with it. When off, the active cursor does not move with the Braille Display.

Keyboard Commands by Function

Most general navigation commands are assigned to single and two button commands from the Braille Display. Some advanced commands are assigned to mnemonic commands using the six dots on the Braille Display to simulate a character. For example, when you are instructed to enter the letter f on the Braille Display, press Dots 1+2+4 simultaneously.

This section lists the commands grouped alphabetically by function name.

6/8-Dot Display = dots 3+6. Toggles between 6-dot and 8-dot display.

6/8-Dot Display = 6. Toggles between 6-dot and 8-dot display.

Advance Display = dot 5. Move the display 40 characters to the right.

Alt-Tab = dots 3+4+5. Performs an ALT+TAB to switch between the two most recently used applications.

Attributes = dots 1+4. Toggles between Attribute and Character display.

Bottom Line = dots 2+3. Moves the display to the bottom line. In PC Cursor mode, the display moves to the last line of the document. In JAWS cursor mode, the display moves to the last line on the screen.

Braille Cursor Tracking = 5. Toggle Braille cursor tracking. When on, the Braille Display follows the active cursor (JAWS cursor or PC cursor). When off, the Braille Display does not follow the active cursor.

Braille Marking = dots 4+6. Rotates through the Braille marking settings.

Braille Marking Off = x. Turns all Braille marking off.

Braille Verbosity = v. Changes the level of verbosity used with the Braille Display.

Character/Attributes = c. Toggles between attribute and character display.

Down Line = dot 3. Move the display down one line on the screen. When in JAWS cursor mode, the display will move down one line on the window. When in PC Cursor mode, the cursor will move down one line in the document.

Eight Pixels/Space = 8. Sets 8 pixels per space. This allows large spaces to be shown as multiple spaces on the Braille Display.

Enter = dots 1+5 (or e). Performs a Windows ENTER keystroke.

Escape = dots 2+5. Performs a Windows ESC keystroke.

Find = F. Performs the JAWS Find command. Searches for text in the active window.

Font = Routing+Dot 1. Announce font at position.

Go To Menu Bar = G. Activates the menu bar of the current application.

Graphics Wizard = 7. Performs the command to label graphics.

Hot Key Help = H. Provides hot key help.

JAWS Menu = J. Activates the JAWS menu.

JAWS/PC Cursor = dot 4. Toggles JAWS between PC Cursor mode and JAWS cursor mode.

Keyboard Help = dots 1+3. Toggles Keyboard Help on/off.

Keyboard Help = K. Toggles Keyboard Help on/off.

Line/Structured Mode = dot 6. Toggle JAWS between Line mode and Structured mode.

Minimize All = m. Minimizes all applications and places the PC cursor on the Windows desktop.

Move Active Cursor = 9. When toggled on, Braille movements will bring the active cursor (JAWS cursor or PC cursor) with it. When off, the active cursor does not move with the Braille Display.

Next Document = n. Performs the Windows CTRL+TAB keystroke. In most applications, this will move you to the next open document.

Open List Box = o. Performs the Windows ALT+DOWN ARROW keystroke. In most applications, this will cause a list box to display more than one option on the screen.

Previous Display = dot 2. Move the display 40 characters to the left.

Previous Document = p. Performs the Windows CTRL+SHIFT+TAB keystroke. In most applications, this will move you to the previous open document.

Route = Routing. Route cursor.

Route Braille to Cursor = r. Routes the Braille Display to the active cursor.

Route JAWS to PC = dots 2+4. Routes the JAWS cursor to the PC cursor.

Route JAWS to PC = i. Routes the JAWS cursor to the PC cursor.

Route PC to JAWS = dots 3+4. Routes the PC cursor to the JAWS cursor.

Say Dialog Box = d. Read the Dialog Box in Tab order.

Say Window Title = s. Announce the current Window Title with speech.

Say Selected Text = z. Announces selected text from the current document.

Shift Tab = dots 4+5. Performs a Windows SHIFT+TAB keystroke.

Start Menu = s. Activates the Windows Start menu.

Tab = dots 5+6. Performs a Windows TAB keystroke.

Top Line = dots 1+2 (or b). Moves the display to the top line. In PC Cursor mode, the display moves to the first line of the document. In JAWS Cursor mode, the display moves to the first line on the screen.

Translate to grade 2 = t. Toggles translation between computer Braille and grade 2 Braille on the Braille Display. Use a reverse t (dots 1+2+5+6) to back translate the word at the cursor.

Unlimited Pixels/Space = 0. Sets an unlimited number of pixels per space. This allows large spaces to be shown as a single space on the display.

Up Line = dot 1 (or a). Move the display up one line on the screen. When in JAWS cursor mode, the display will move up one line on the window. When in PC Cursor mode, the cursor will move up one line in the document.

Windows Key Help = w. Provides help about command windows keystrokes.

JAWS/RBT 40 Quick Reference Guide

Single Dot Commands

Dot 1 = Up line.

Dot 4 = JAWS/PC cursor.

Dot 2 = Previous display.

Dot 5 = Next display.

Dot 3 = Down line.

Dot 6 = Line/Structured mode.

Two Dot Commands

Dots 1, 2 = Top line.

Dots 1, 3 = Keyboard Help.

Dots 2, 3 = Bottom line.

Dots 4, 6 = Braille marking.

Dots 4, 5 = SHIFT+TAB.

Dots 3, 4, 5 = ALT+TAB.

Dots 1, 4 = Toggle Attributes.

Dots 5, 6 = TAB.

Dots 2, 5 = ESC.

Dots 3, 6 = Toggle 6/8-dots.

Dots 1, 5 = ENTER.

Dots 2, 4 = Route JAWS to PC cursor.

Dots 3, 4 = Route PC cursor to JAWS.

Routing Commands

Routing Button = Route cursor.

Dot 1+Routing Button = Announce font.

Dot 3+Routing Button = Select text.

Alphabetical Commands

A = Up line.

B = Top line.

C = Character attributes.

D = Read dialog box.

E = ENTER.

F = Find.

G = Go to Menu Bar.

H = Hot Key Help.

I = Route JAWS to PC cursor.

J = JAWS menu.

K = Keyboard Help.

L = Unassigned.

M = Minimize all.

N = Next document (CTRL+TAB).

O = Open List Box (ALT+DOWN ARROW).

P = Previous document (SHIFT+CTRL+TAB).

Q = Unavailable.

R = Route Braille to active cursor.

S = Start menu.

T = Read window title.

U = Unassigned.

V = Braille verbosity.

W = Windows keys Help.

X = Braille marking off.

Y = Unavailable.

Z = Say selected text.

0 = Unlimited pixels/space.

1 = Previous.

2 = Bottom line.

3 = Escape.

4 = Unassigned.

5 = Toggle Braille cursor tracking.

6 = Toggle 6/8-dots.

7 = Graphics labeler.

8 = Eight pixels/space.

9 = Braille moves active cursor toggle.

Hardware Installation and Configuration

In this section, you will learn about the connectors and button layout of the RBT 40. Use this section to find out how to connect the cables to your computer and the Braille Display, and where the command buttons and power switch are located. You'll also learn how to configure the orientation and emulation mode you wish to use, and how to remove and attach the storage tray.

The RBT 40 is shipped with the storage tray attached to the display. You may wish to follow the instructions below for removing the storage tray now. The storage tray hides one of the connector ports on the RBT 40. Removing the storage tray now will allow you to find all the connector ports and decide on the best configuration for your use.

Removing and Attaching the Storage Tray

Before starting, place the RBT 40 flat on a table or work surface.

Warning: Once the retaining screws are removed, it is very easy to drop the RBT 40. Make sure the RBT 40 is on a flat surface to avoid damaging the display.

The storage tray is attached to the display by four retaining screws. Two screws are located on each side of the display. Remove all four retaining screws. Slide the RBT 40 toward you and out of the guide brackets attached to the storage tray. You may want to place the retaining screws in the storage tray for safekeeping.

To attach the storage tray, place the storage tray on a table or flat surface. Place the RBT 40 on the guide brackets and slide back against the storage tray. Attach all four retaining screws before lifting the display.

Using the Storage Tray

To open the storage tray, grasp the tray on the side with one hand and pull on the handle located in the back. The storage tray can be removed completely from the expansion chassis. The storage tray has two dividers, which can be removed to allow storage of different sized items.

RBT 40 Ports and Switches

With the storage tray removed, you will be able to find all the ports and switches on the RBT 40. On the back panel toward the left edge of the display is a rectangular 10-pin port. Along the left edge toward the center you will find another port that is similar.

These ports are used to connect the RBT 40 to your computer. Use only one of the ports. They are both the same and two ports are provided for more flexibility when connecting to your computer.

Note: The rear connector port can still be used with the storage tray attached. The connector port is recessed and a notch is cut in the storage tray to allow the flat ribbon cable to come out of the back of the unit.

In addition, along the left panel, just back of the connector port, you will find a small round port. This is the AC adapter and charger port.

On the right panel of the RBT 40, you will find the On/Off switch. The On position is indicated with a small dot. Press the On/Off switch down toward the dot to turn the RBT 40 on. Press the On/Off switch down away from the dot to turn the display off.

At either end of the Braille Display on the top panel, you will find 3 buttons arranged vertically. These buttons are used singly and in combination to control the RBT 40. The buttons are numbered 1, 2 and 3 on the left side and 4, 5, and 6 on the right side.

When the orientation of the Braille Display is reversed, so is the orientation for the buttons. See JAWS for Windows Software Installation for more information about using these buttons with your screen reader.

Above each Braille cell is a small switch. These cell switches will make a tiny click when pressed. See JAWS for Windows Software Installation for more information about using these switches with your screen reader.

Connecting the RBT 40 to Your Computer

Select which port on the RBT 40 you wish to use to connect the display to your computer. Both ports are configured identically and are provided to allow the most flexibility. For example, you might want to reverse the display and use the side port for communicating with the computer.

1.    Find the rectangular end of the flat ribbon cable. It will have a small notch along one edge of the connector. Align the cable with the notch facing down and push the connector in to the port you wish to use.

Warning: Be careful not to force the cable. You may bend or break a pin in the port.

2.    If the connector does not feel like it is seating correctly, check to make sure none of the pins on the port are bent.

3.    Attach the other end of the flat ribbon cable to one of the serial ports on your computer. Be sure to note which port you are using (COM1, COM2, COM3 or COM4). You will probably need to tell your screen reader which port you have used to connect to the RBT 40.

Configuring the RBT40

The RBT 40 can emulate Baum Braille Displays or Handy Tech displays. In addition, the display can be reversed to provide a more comfortable orientation for the user. This section describes how to set and save the orientation and emulation for the display.

Selecting an Emulation Mode

Before you begin, make sure the display is turned on. The display will show a firmware version number and then say toward the end "Mode-1 Baum."

Note: Numbers show up on the display as the corresponding letter with dot 6 turned on. This is the German Braille method for indicating numbers. When you start the RBT 40 with your screen reading software, the correct Braille tables are used.

The display may also say "Mode-2 Emul. 2," or "Mode-3 Emul. 3," or "Mode-4 Emul 4."

To select an emulation mode:

1.    Press the bottom button on either side of the display (button 3 or 6). Each time you press the button, the display will change to show the new emulation mode. Select emulation 1 for Baum and emulation 2 for Handy Tech.

2.    Press and hold buttons 1 and 3 (or buttons 4 and 6) together until the display flashes and shows the word Saved. This saves the emulation mode so that the next time you turn on the RBT 40 it will already be set.

Selecting the Orientation

You may want to reverse the orientation of the Braille Display, allowing you to place the cells directly in front of the keyboard or laptop computer.

To reverse the orientation:

1.    Press 2 and 5 on each side of the display. Each time you press the button, the display will reverse its orientation.

2.    Press and hold buttons 1 and 3 (or buttons 4 and 6) together until the display flashes and shows the word Saved. This saves the orientation so that the next time you turn on the RBT 40 it will already be set.

Charging and Treatment of the Batteries

Before using the RBT 40, be sure to fully charge the batteries. Use only the charger provided with the RBT 40 when charging the batteries. Plug it into the round power connector on the left side of the display, behind the interface connector.

Even when the Braille Display is turned off, but connected to power, the display will show the charging time elapsed. After two minutes, the display "goes to sleep." To reactivate the charge time display, press any key.

Charging the batteries completely takes from 2 to 2 1/2 hours. When charging is complete, the total charging time is displayed.

When the batteries are nearly discharged, the RBT 40 automatically switches off to prevent a total discharge that might cause damage to the batteries. Twenty minutes before the RBT 40 switches off, the Braille Display shows a warning: Low Bat. 20 min. remaining.

After pressing any key, you can continue to work with the RBT 40. You should, however, connect the RBT 40 with the charger as soon as possible before the unit is turned off completely. During the last twenty minutes, the low battery warning will be repeated several times. A full-capacity battery should last between 40 and 50 hours.

If the RBT 40 is not used for more than 15 minutes, it turns off automatically. This battery conservation method preserves the full life of the battery. To proceed with your work, simply turn the RBT 40 off, and then on again.

JAWS for Windows Software Installation

This section provides instructions for installing JAWS for use with the RBT 40.

Installing the RBT 40 with JAWS

JAWS contains the drivers for the RBT 40 on the JAWS distribution CD. To install JAWS for use with the RBT 40, you must choose the guided or advanced installation when prompted. Follow the prompts to select which directory in which to install JAWS, and which synthesizers to install. When you are prompted for a Braille Display, use the DOWN ARROW key to scroll toward the bottom of the list. Select the RBT 40 (Rabbit) selection. Next, select the serial port you used to connect the RBT 40 to your computer. Continue with the JAWS installation.

After you complete the JAWS installation, be sure your RBT 40 is in the correct emulation and start JAWS following the instructions in your JAWS documentation. For a list of the JAWS commands assigned to the panel keys of your Braille Display, go to JAWS/RBT 40 Quick Reference Guide.

 

 

  ------ --- --------------
  Back       Next Section
  ------ --- --------------

Advanced Braille Display Options

The Focus and PAC Mate Braille displays allow you to adjust the location of the status cells, as well as vary the firmness of the braille dots to suit your needs.

To adjust these settings, open Settings Center, expand the Braille group, and select the Advanced group. To apply changes to all applications, press CTRL+SHIFT+D to load the JAWS default settings. To apply changes to a specific application, select it from the Applications combo box.

Placement of Status Cells

Specify if the informational status cells on the Focus display are located on the left or right end of the display, or choose to not display them at all. The status cells are located at the left end of the display by default.

Dot Firmness

Specify the firmness of the braille dots on the Focus or PAC Mate display. There are five levels of firmness. Adjust the display to the level of firmness most suited to the sensitivity of your fingers.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Navigation Example

1.    Press RIGHT SHIFT+2 (RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3) to open the Run JAWS Manager dialog.

2.    Scroll through the list with your Whiz Wheels to find Keyboard Manager.

3.    Press DOT 8 for ENTER.

4.    Press DOTS 4-5 to TAB to the keystrokes list.

5.    Use the Whiz Wheels to move down to the keystroke you wish to view.

6.    Use the Braille Bottom Of Window command (DOTS 4-5-6 CHORD) to read a short description in the status line.

7.    Return to the location of the selected keystroke with the Route Braille to Active Cursor command, the letter R on your display (DOTS 1-2-3-5).

Following the example, information is gathered without the need to switch between using the keyboard and the Focus Braille display.

 

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Focus Commands for Web Pages

For your convenience, we have provided both the Braille signs for each command and the dot pattern equivalents. Just navigate to the column heading of the notation method you prefer, and press ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW to move through the listing of commands. You will hear only the command description and the Braille sign or dot pattern, not both. If there is no Braille sign corresponding to the dot patterns, the dot patterns are listed in both columns. Use computer Braille for numbers noted in the Braille Sign column.

  ---------------------------- ------------------- --------------------------
  Description                  Braille Sign        Braille Dot Patterns
  Move to Next Non Link Text   RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 8   RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 8
  Select a Heading             RIGHT SHIFT+6       RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5
  Select a Link                RIGHT SHIFT+7       RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5-6
  List Toolbar Buttons         RIGHT SHIFT+8       RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-6
  Select a Frame               RIGHT SHIFT+9       RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 3-5
  ---------------------------- ------------------- --------------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ----------------
  Back       Focus Overview
  ------ --- ----------------

Focus Commands for Microsoft Word

For your convenience, we have provided both the Braille signs for each command and the dot pattern equivalents. Just navigate to the column heading of the notation method you prefer, and press ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW to move through the listing of commands. You will hear only the command description and the Braille sign or dot pattern, not both. If there is no Braille sign corresponding to the dot patterns, the dot patterns are listed in both columns. Use computer Braille for numbers noted in the Braille Sign column.

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Description                                                                    | Braille Sign              | Braille Dot Patterns           |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Bold Text                                                                      | LEFT SHIFT+B              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2            |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Italic Text                                                                    | LEFT SHIFT+I              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4            |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Underline Text                                                                 | LEFT SHIFT+U              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-6          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Center Text                                                                    | LEFT SHIFT+E              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-5            |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Style                                                                          | LEFT SHIFT+S              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-4          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Point Size                                                                     | LEFT SHIFT+P              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-4        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Open Font Dialog                                                               | LEFT SHIFT+F              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Left Align                                                                     | LEFT SHIFT+L              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Right Align                                                                    | LEFT SHIFT+R              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-5        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Justify Text                                                                   | LEFT SHIFT+J              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4-5          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Indent                                                                         | LEFT SHIFT+M              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-4          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Outdent                                                                        | LEFT SHIFT+M CHORD        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-4 CHORD    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
|                                                                                | LEFT SHIFT+L CHORD        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD    |
|                                                                                |                           |                                |
| List Spelling Errors                                                           |                           |                                |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| List Grammatical Errors                                                        | LEFT SHIFT+G              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4-5        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| List Revisions                                                                 | LEFT SHIFT+V CHORD        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-6 CHORD  |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| List Hyperlinks                                                                | RIGHT SHIFT+8             | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-6         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| List Comments                                                                  | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 3 CHORD    | LEFT SHIFT+DOT 3 CHORD         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| List Inline Objects                                                            | LEFT SHIFT+O              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-5          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Select a Table                                                                 | RIGHT SHIFT+T CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-4-5 CHORD |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Select a Field                                                                 | RIGHT SHIFT+L CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD   |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| List Smart Tags                                                                | RIGHT SHIFT+S CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-4 CHORD   |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Open Smart Tag Menu                                                            | LEFT SHIFT+S CHORD        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-4 CHORD    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Next Page                                                                      | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6 CHORD | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6 CHORD      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Previous Page                                                                  | LEFT SHIFT+K CHORD        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3 CHORD      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Switch Panes                                                                   | LEFT SHIFT+6              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Read Mistake and Suggestion                                                    | RIGHT SHIFT+7             | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5-6       |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Toggle Insert/Overtype Mode                                                    | LEFT SHIFT+I CHORD        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4 CHORD      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Close Office Assistant                                                         | LEFT SHIFT+4              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-5-6          |
|                                                                                |                           |                                |
| Note: The Office Assistant is not available in Microsoft Office 2007 or later. |                           |                                |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+

 

 

  ------ --- ----------------
  Back       Focus Overview
  ------ --- ----------------

Focus Commands for Microsoft Excel

For your convenience, we have provided both the Braille signs for each command and the dot pattern equivalents. Just navigate to the column heading of the notation method you prefer, and press ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW to move through the listing of commands. You will hear only the command description and the Braille sign or dot pattern, not both. If there is no Braille sign corresponding to the dot patterns, the dot patterns are listed in both columns. Use computer Braille for numbers noted in the Braille Sign column.

+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Description                                                                    | Braille Sign              | Braille Dot Patterns              |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Bold Text                                                                      | LEFT SHIFT+B              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2               |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Italic Text                                                                    | LEFT SHIFT+I              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4               |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Underline Text                                                                 | LEFT SHIFT+U              | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-6             |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Move to First Cell                                                             | L                         | DOTS 1-2-3                        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Move to Last Cell                                                              | DOTS 4-5-6                | DOTS 4-5-6                        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| List Column                                                                    | RIGHT SHIFT+C CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-4 CHORD        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| List Row                                                                       | RIGHT SHIFT+R CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-5 CHORD    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Select Column                                                                  | LEFT SHIFT CHORD          | LEFT SHIFT CHORD                  |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Select Row                                                                     | RIGHT SHIFT CHORD         | RIGHT SHIFT CHORD                 |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| List Cells at Page Breaks                                                      | RIGHT SHIFT+B CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2 CHORD        |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| List Cells with Comments                                                       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 3 CHORD   | RIGHT SHIFT+DOT 3 CHORD           |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| List Visible Cells with Data                                                   | RIGHT SHIFT+D CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-4-5 CHORD      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Next Sheet                                                                     | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6 CHORD | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 4-6 CHORD         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Prior Sheet                                                                    | LEFT SHIFT+K CHORD        | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3 CHORD         |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Move to Worksheet                                                              | RIGHT SHIFT+S             | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-4            |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Move to Monitor Cell                                                           | RIGHT SHIFT+M CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-4 CHORD      |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                                                                | FOR Sign                  | DOTS 1-2-3-4-5-6                  |
|                                                                                |                           |                                   |
| Formula Mode                                                                   |                           |                                   |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Auto Sum                                                                       | LEFT SHIFT+FOR Sign CHORD | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-4-5-6 CHORD |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Report Gridline Status                                                         | RIGHT SHIFT+G CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-4-5 CHORD    |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Select Region                                                                  | RIGHT SHIFT+8             | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-6            |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Select Worksheet Objects                                                       | RIGHT SHIFT+O             | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-5            |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Time Stamp                                                                     | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 5-6       | LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 5-6               |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Read Mistake and Suggestion                                                    | RIGHT SHIFT+7             | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5-6          |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Close Office Assistant                                                         | RIGHT SHIFT+4 CHORD       | RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-5-6 CHORD      |
|                                                                                |                           |                                   |
| Note: The Office Assistant is not available in Microsoft Office 2007 or later. |                           |                                   |
+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------------+

 

 

  ------ --- ----------------
  Back       Focus Overview
  ------ --- ----------------

Focus Commands for Microsoft Powerpoint

For your convenience, we have provided both the Braille signs for each command and the dot pattern equivalents. Just navigate to the column heading of the notation method you prefer, and press ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW to move through the listing of commands. You will hear only the command description and the Braille sign or dot pattern, not both. If there is no Braille sign corresponding to the dot patterns, the dot patterns are listed in both columns. Use computer Braille for numbers noted in the Braille Sign column.

  ------------------------------- ------------------------ -----------------------------
  Description                     Braille Sign             Braille Dot Patterns
  Bold Text                       LEFT SHIFT+B             LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2
  Italic Text                     LEFT SHIFT+I             LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4
  Underline Text                  LEFT SHIFT+U             LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-6
  Center Text                     LEFT SHIFT+E             LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-5
  Left Align                      LEFT SHIFT+L CHORD       LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD
  Right Align                     LEFT SHIFT+R             LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-5
  ENTER                           DOT 8                    DOT 8
  Next Object                     DOTS 4-5                 DOTS 4-5
  Prior Object                    B                        DOTS 1-2
  Next Slide                      CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON    CURSOR ROUTING BUTTON
  Switch Panes                    LEFT SHIFT+6             LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5
  Switch Panes Reverse            LEFT SHIFT+6 CHORD       LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5 CHORD
  Read Speakers Notes             LEFT SHIFT+N             LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-4-5
  Retreat Slide Show              DOT 7                    DOT 7
  Select Hyperlink                RIGHT SHIFT+7            RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5-6
  Follow Selected Hyperlink       LEFT SHIFT+DOT 8         LEFT SHIFT+DOT 8
  Select Shape                    RIGHT SHIFT+8            RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-6
  Toggle Expand or Collapse All   LEFT SHIFT+DOT 1 CHORD   LEFT SHIFT+DOT 1 CHORD
  ------------------------------- ------------------------ -----------------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ----------------
  Back       Focus Overview
  ------ --- ----------------

Focus Commands for Microsoft FrontPage

For your convenience, we have provided both the Braille signs for each command and the dot pattern equivalents. Just navigate to the column heading of the notation method you prefer, and press ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW to move through the listing of commands. You will hear only the command description and the Braille sign or dot pattern, not both. If there is no Braille sign corresponding to the dot patterns, the dot patterns are listed in both columns. Use computer Braille for numbers noted in the Braille Sign column.

  ----------------------------- -------------------- -----------------------------
  Description                   Braille Sign         Braille Dot Patterns
  Bold Text                     LEFT SHIFT+B         LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2
  Italic Text                   LEFT SHIFT+I         LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 2-4
  Underline Text                LEFT SHIFT+U         LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-3-6
  Center Text                   LEFT SHIFT+E         LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-5
  Left Align                    LEFT SHIFT+L CHORD   LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3 CHORD
  Right Align                   LEFT SHIFT+R         LEFT SHIFT+DOTS 1-2-3-5
  Read Mistake and Suggestion   RIGHT SHIFT+7        RIGHT SHIFT+DOTS 2-3-5-6
  ----------------------------- -------------------- -----------------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ----------------
  Back       Focus Overview
  ------ --- ----------------

Using the ALVA DOS Screen Reader in Combination with JAWS

It is now possible to use the ALVA DOS screen reader in a DOS box while using JAWS for standard Windows programs. To accomplish this, you need to take care of three things.

First you need to load the ALVA DOS software. This can be done during start up, by means of an entry in autoexec.bat or by starting the ALVA DOS screen reader from inside the DOS box. Please consult the documentation of the ALVA DOS software for more detailed information on loading the ALVA DOS screen reader.

Second, you need to tell the ALVA Windows drivers to disable themselves when a DOS box becomes active. This is done by adding the next line to ABTWIN.INI

checkdosbox=yes

In the properties dialog of the MS DOS prompt on the "Misc." page, you have to check the checkbox "Always suspend" in the "Background" group.

Having taken care of these three things, JAWS will no longer support Braille in a DOS box, and the ALVA Windows drivers will not process keystrokes on the Braille display so the ALVA DOS screen reader can take care of your DOS session.

The checkdosbox option is only available for parallel connection.

Not all versions of Windows support installation of DOS drivers at start up.

 

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

 
