JAWS 5.0 Dictionary Manager

Table of Contents

Introduction to Dictionary Manager

Dictionary Manager Basics

Dictionary Manager Menu Options

Introduction to Dictionary Manager

The Dictionary Manager lets you change the way JAWS speaks words, phrases, abbreviations, or symbols. If JAWS mispronounces your name, for example, you can change the pronunciation with the Dictionary Manager. You can also assign a sound to play, speak the word in a different language, or any combination of these options. JAWS contains a large dictionary of words and their pronunciations. As a word is read on the screen, JAWS checks it against the dictionary and follows the rules when it speaks the word. You can use the Dictionary Manager to Add, Change, or Delete word pronunciation rules.

Tip: Dictionary Manager allows you to modify the way JAWS reads whole words or part of words. To redefine pronunciation of specific characters, refer to Adding Speech for Special Symbols.

Dictionary Manager Basics

Dictionary Manager Menu Options

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Dictionary Manager Basics

Add a Word to the Dictionary Manager

Turn Off Dictionary

Change or Delete Existing Entries

Dictionary Entries Tree Menu

Shared Dictionary Files

As with all the JAWS Managers, you can change the options for all applications by modifying the Default Dictionary file, or only change the options for a specific application by modifying the Dictionary file for that program. The easy way to open the Dictionary file for the current application is to press INSERT+D while using the application. This keystroke opens the Dictionary Manager and opens the Application Dictionary file. If the current application does not have an Application Dictionary file, JAWS creates one for you. JAWS creates dictionary files using the name of the program file and the extension .jdf, for JAWS Dictionary File. The default JAWS Dictionary file that controls all applications including JAWS, is named Default.jdf. To open the Default Dictionary file, open the Dictionary Manager with the keystroke INSERT+D, and press CTRL+SHIFT+D to open Default.jdf.

If JAWS mispronounces your name, it is likely that you would want to change this in the default file. You might use an application dictionary file to change things like abbreviations in e-mail, but not in your word processor. For example, in Microsoft Outlook, you might want w/ to be pronounced, "with," but in Microsoft Word, you may need to know if it is abbreviated or not.

Add a Word to the Dictionary Manager

Add a word to Dictionary Manager to specify how you want JAWS to pronounce that word.

1.    Locate the word in an application and move the active cursor to the beginning of the word.

2.    Press INSERT+F2, select "Dictionary Manager," and press ENTER. You can also use the shortcut INSERT+D. If the application does not currently have a dictionary (.jdf) file, JAWS creates a new file. Press ENTER to accept the suggested file name or type a new name and choose OK.

3.    When Dictionary Manager opens, do one of the following:

o   If you want to change how the word is pronounced only in the current application, choose the Add button.

o   If you want to change how the word is pronounced in all applications, press CTRL+SHIFT+D, then choose the Add button.

4.    When you choose Add, the Add Dictionary Definition dialog box opens. The Actual Word edit box displays the word that was at the location of the active cursor when you first opened Dictionary Manager. You may need to delete punctuation marks from the end of the actual word. If the word you want to add is different than the contents of the edit box, edit or replace what is there with the word you want to add.

5.    Press TAB to move to the Replacement Word edit box and type the corrected pronunciation. When you add or change a dictionary definition, you are telling JAWS how to phonetically pronounce the word. The Replacement Word can be a word or a combination of letters and spaces. You may need to try several combinations until JAWS speaks the word or phrase correctly. Press the access key ALT+A to hear the actual word, and press ALT+R to hear the replacement word.
 
 If you only want to assign a sound or different language to the word, leave the Replacement Word edit box blank. However, if you do not type a replacement word when assigning a sound, JAWS plays the sound and does not speak the word at all. To hear both the word and the sound, type the word as is in the Replacement Word edit box.

6.    If you want JAWS to play a sound when you read this word, choose the Select Sound button. Use the arrow keys to select the sound you want JAWS to play and choose OK. To sample the sound that you selected, choose the Play Sound button.

Tip: The Open Sound dialog box only displays sound files in your user and shared settings folders. To use a sound saved in another location, choose the Import button. Navigate to the folder where the sound is located, select it, and press ENTER to copy the sound into your user settings folder. You can then select the sound from the list.

7.    Next, you can customize the dictionary rule so that it applies only when JAWS encounters this word while using a specific language, synthesizer and voice. If you want to do this, perform the following, otherwise, go to step 8.
 
 Select a language from the Language combo box to limit a dictionary rule to a specific language. The default value is All Languages, which means that the rule applies to all languages, synthesizers and voices. If you select a specific language from the combo box, press TAB to move to the Synthesizer combo box. Otherwise, continue to step 8.
 
 Select a synthesizer from the Synthesizer combo box to limit a dictionary rule to a specific synthesizer associated with the previously selected language. The default value is All Synthesizers, which means that the rule applies to all synthesizers and voices. If you select a specific synthesizer from the combo box, you can further refine the rule to include an exact voice that is supported by the synthesizer and language. Press TAB to move to the Voice combo box. Otherwise, continue to step 8.
 
 Select a voice from the Voice combo box to limit a dictionary rule to a specific voice for the current synthesizer and language. The default value is All Voices, which applies the rule to all voices for the selected synthesizer.

8.    If you want the replacement word spoken in another language, select a language from the Speak Replacement Word Using Language combo box. When Default is selected, JAWS will use the current language to speak this word. The languages that are available for this combo box will vary based on your selections in the Language and Synthesizer combo boxes in the Applies to group of the Dictionary Manager.

9.    If you select the Case Sensitive check box, JAWS will apply the dictionary definition to match the text that is typed into the Actual Word edit box. For example, if the word is capitalized, then the rule only applies to capitalized instances of that word. When the check box is cleared, JAWS will apply the definition to the Actual Word value no matter its case.

10. When you are satisfied with the way JAWS speaks the word, press ENTER to accept the change.

11. Press CTRL+S to save your changes to the JAWS dictionary file. JAWS saves new or modified dictionary files in your user settings folder.

Root Word Pronunciation Changes

Dictionary Manager also lets you specify the root of a word, and have all the extensions of it pronounced correctly. So with one entry, you could change the pronunciation of "reposition," "repositioning," and "repositions." Just follow the steps above, but add an asterisk (*) at the end of the word in the Actual Word edit box within Dictionary Manager. Type in the replacement word as normal. For example, type "reposition*" in the Actual Word edit box, and type "re position" in the Replacement Word edit box.

Turn Off Dictionary

Use Settings Center to turn off the dictionary when you do not want the dictionary changes to affect screen reading. To do this, do the following:

1.    Open Settings Center (INSERT+F2), and expand the Text Processing group.

2.    Expand the General group, and select Use Dictionary.

3.    Press SPACEBAR to clear the check box.

4.    Choose OK to save changes and close Settings Center.

Note: To turn on the dictionary, repeat these steps, and select the Use Dictionary check box.

Change or Delete Existing Entries in the Dictionary Manager

You can change or delete entries that you have added to the current dictionary file. To change an entry, select it in the Dictionary Entries list. After you select the entry you want to change or delete, choose either the Change or Delete button. Choosing the Change button opens the Change Dictionary Definition dialog box. You can then make any changes to the entry.

Similarly, you can choose the Delete button to delete the selected dictionary entry. JAWS prompts you to confirm your choice to delete the entry.

When you have finished changing or deleting entries, press CTRL+S to save your changes to the dictionary file.

Dictionary Entries Tree Menu 

The Dictionary Entries tree view contains a list of all rules for the current Dictionary Manager. In addition to creating rules for specific words, rules can also be defined to restrict the rule to a particular language, synthesizer, or voice. If such a rule exists, the language will appear at the top of the tree view. The language rules restrict the dictionary rule to text spoken in the language. Use the RIGHT ARROW key to expand the tree for a specific language to access language specific rules. Further restrictions within the language can apply to specific synthesizers.  The synthesizer rules restrict the dictionary rule to text spoken with a specific synthesizer. Use the RIGHT ARROW key to expand the tree for a specific synthesizer to access synthesizer specific rules. Further restrictions within the synthesizer can apply to specific synthesizer voices.  The voice rules restrict the dictionary rule to text spoken with a specific synthesizer voice. Use the RIGHT ARROW key to expand the tree for a specific synthesizer voice to access synthesizer voice specific rules. Use the LEFT ARROW to collapse items, and use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to move through and select items in the tree view. First letter navigation is also available so that you can quickly jump to an item in the tree view.

Shared Dictionary Files

JAWS allows you to have both user and shared versions of a dictionary file for the same application. JAWS applies the settings in user dictionary files only when a particular user is logged on to the computer. The settings in shared files apply to all users on the computer or network. This allows system administrators to create dictionary entries for all users on a network or computer. If a user creates a modified version of a shared dictionary file, those settings override the shared settings while that user is logged on the computer.

JAWS saves shared dictionary files in Documents and Settings\All Users\Application Data\Freedom Scientific\JAWS\X (where X is the JAWS version number)\Settings\Enu. JAWS saves your user dictionary files in Documents and Settings\User Name\Application Data\Freedom Scientific\JAWS\X (where X is the JAWS version number)\Settings\Enu.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Dictionary Manager Menu Options

The Dictionary Manager dialog Menu Bar offers three options:

File

View

Help

File Menu

In the File menu, you have the following options:

New - Choose New to add Dictionary files for applications that do not already have .jdf files. After you choose this command, type a name for this dictionary file and press ENTER.

Note: Pressing INSERT+D while in the current application automatically opens a new dictionary file if one does not exist for that application.

Open - If you want to make a change to the Dictionary files for several applications, select the .jdf file for the application from the Open File dialog and press ENTER to open the Dictionary file. You can then add, change, or delete a dictionary entry for that application. The list of files contains both shared and user files located in the JAWS settings folders. To copy a dictionary file from another location into your user settings folder, choose the Import button.

Save - Saves the dictionary file after changes are entered. If the file is unnamed, a Save As dialog box opens. It is important to name the file with the same name as the program file. JAWS will save the file with the extension .jdf.

Open Default File - If you want the word to be spoken the same way in every application, choose Open Default File (CTRL+SHIFT+D) to add, change, or delete default dictionary entries.

View Menu

In the View menu, you have the following options:

Toolbar - Press ENTER to display or hide a basic toolbar menu in the Dictionary Manager dialog.

Status Bar - Press ENTER to display or hide the status of the current processing request.

Display Full Path - Press ENTER to display or hide the complete current file location.

Help Menu 

In the Help menu, you have the following options:

Help Topics - This option opens JAWS help to the Dictionary Manager help topics.

About Dictionary Manager - This option displays information about the specific Dictionary Manager version.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 
