JAWS

Table of Contents

Introduction

Welcome

What's New in JAWS?

System Requirements

Getting Started with JAWS

Installing JAWS

Activating JAWS

Migrate Settings

Startup Wizard

Updating JAWS

Getting Help

Help!

Using JAWS Help

Help at Your Fingertips

Virtual Viewer

Tutor Mode

JAWS Training Materials

Using JAWS

JAWS Utilities and Program Group

Starting JAWS for Windows

Reading Screens and Documents

Advanced Reading of Screens and Documents

Adjusting JAWS Options

The JAWS Application Window

The JAWS Application Window

Options Menu Overview

Utilities Menu Overview

Language Menu Overview

Help Menu Overview

Manage Application Settings

Basic Settings

JAWS Basic Settings

Braille Basic Settings

Voice Settings

Selecting a Voice Profile

Voice Profile Adjustment Settings

Add/Remove Voices

Adding Speech for Special Symbols

About Cursors

Using the PC Cursor

Using the JAWS Cursor

Using the Invisible Cursor

Using the Virtual PC Cursor

Using the Braille Cursor

Using the Touch Cursor

Using JAWS with a Touch Screen

Overview of the JAWS Utilities

Using the Clipboard

Window List Dialog

Select a System Tray Icon Dialog

Select a Symbol to Print Dialog

Using the Internet with JAWS

Browsing the Internet

Reference Tools

Convenient OCR

Picture Smart

Research It

Speech History

Keystrokes

Keyboard Commands

JAWS Keystrokes

JAWS Keystrokes

JAWS Keystrokes for Reading Text

Change Voice Rate on the Fly

Navigation - Information Keystrokes

JAWS Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

JAWS Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation

Miscellaneous JAWS Keystrokes

Keystrokes for Accessing the JAWS Utilities

Table Layer Keystrokes

Keystrokes for Working in Tables

JAWS Keystrokes for Accessing Help

Laptop JAWS Keystrokes

Laptop Keystrokes

Laptop Keystrokes for Reading Text and Information

Laptop Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation

Standard Windows Keystrokes

Standard Windows Keystrokes

General Windows Keystrokes

General Windows Application Keystrokes

Windows Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

Windows Keystrokes for Working with Text

Keystrokes for Working in Windows Explorer

Keystrokes for Using the Clipboard

Keystrokes for Popular Applications

Quick Settings

Quick Settings

Settings Import and Export

Importing and Exporting User Settings

Synthesizer and Braille Manager

Using the Synthesizer and Braille Manager

Sound Cards

Sound Cards

Graphics Labeler

Graphics Labeler Overview

Creating a Graphic Label Manually

Using the Auto Graphics Labeler

Prompt Creator

Add and Change Prompts

Creating a Prompt

Custom Tutor Messages

Deleting Prompts

Troubleshooting Prompts

Frame Viewer

Introduction to Frames

Creating a Frame

Frame Viewer

Frame Properties

Validation Rules

Frame Events

Frame Defaults

Troubleshooting Frames

Customize List View

Customizing List Views

Customize Column Headers Dialog

Navigation Quick Key Manager

Navigation Quick Key Manager

Remote Access

Contacting Freedom Scientific

Contact and Sales Information

Help Improve Freedom Scientific Products

License Agreement

Technical Support

Technical Support

Error Reporting

JAWS 2020

[JAWS screen reader logo]

 

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| What's New?                       | New Users Start Here!             |
|                                   |                                   |
| Using JAWS Help                   | Keyboard Commands                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Welcome

Congratulations on your purchase of JAWS for Windows, the international standard for screen reading software. As Windows software has evolved, JAWS has risen to meet the challenge to allow blind and low vision users access to the same information that others have on the World Wide Web, in popular applications, and when reading specialized document formats such as PDF or HTML.

Furthermore, JAWS is part of a family of products for blind and low vision computer users, which includes screen magnification software, scanning and reading software, a PDA for the blind, Braille displays, and notetakers. The newest versions of Freedom Scientific's products not only work with each other, but also do not interfere with other accessibility products on the same PC.

Your decision to use JAWS as your computer screen reader is an excellent choice. With JAWS you'll find that your access to the Internet is unparalleled. Using JAWS with Microsoft's Internet Explorer is easy, so you'll be surfing in no time. Additionally, JAWS supports the most popular office software products so that you'll be able to work in the same software environment as other Windows computer users. There are numerous other applications that are supported in JAWS, including word processors, encyclopedias, financial and spreadsheet packages, e-mail and messaging applications, and more.

For Braille users, JAWS provides functionality that improves the efficiency and quality of your work when using a Braille display. It also provides an accurate representation, in Braille, of what's displayed on your computer's screen.

There are numerous settings that allow you to customize JAWS to meet your individual needs, including how much information is provided globally and in individual applications. Dozens of other options allow you to set your own voices, keystrokes, HTML preferences, verbosity levels, and more. With JAWS scripting, you can customize JAWS to work with any application, such as proprietary software developed by large employers. This feature provides ultimate flexibility and expandability, making JAWS an excellent investment for the present and future.

The links below will help you get started with JAWS:

What's New in JAWS?

New Users Start Here

Reading Screens and Documents

Using JAWS with Internet Explorer

Keyboard Commands

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

What's New in JAWS?

JAWS 2020 offers several new features and improvements as described on this page. To learn more, read the entire What's New or press INSERT+F6 to open a list of headings and then jump directly to a specific item.

To read about features and updates made in earlier JAWS releases, visit the What's New in JAWS web page and choose a previous release from the combo box on this page.

Reduced Double Speaking of Form Control Prompts

When navigating and filling out forms on the web, it has become increasingly common for web page authors to include the prompt inside the control in addition to assigning an accessible Tag for the control. While non-screen reader users only see the written prompt, those using a screen reader are getting both the Prompt and accessible Tag in Speech as well as Braille if a display is in use. Often times, the web page author has assigned the same text for each, so it appears the screen reader is double speaking. In JAWS 2020, we have greatly reduced the amount of double speaking of form controls as you navigate using speech and Braille by comparing the prompt and these tags, and only speaking or brailling them both if they are different.

Zoom Meeting Scripts Added for an Improved Experience

Thanks to Hartgen Consulting, basic scripts for Zoom are now included directly in JAWS and Fusion to improve the experience when attending Zoom Meetings. This platform is used for our quarterly FS Open Line program as well as the free training webinars we hold each month. These scripts offer a more pleasant experience by giving more control over what you hear, without interrupting the flow as users enter or leave the room or make comments. Press INSERT+H to view a list of JAWS keystrokes available in Zoom such as turning off alerts, speaking recent chat messages, and more. You can also press INSERT+W to view a list of Zoom hot keys.

Hartgen Consultancy also offers more advanced scripts for Zoom Pro if you are interested.

Enhanced JAWS and Invisible Cursor Support for Windows 10 Universal Apps

For years, JAWS has provided the ability for users to quickly review text on the screen without changing the system focus. For instance, if you need to access information in a dialog box that is not accessible using TAB or SHIFT+TAB, you could press NUM PAD MINUS or NUM PAD MINUS twice quickly to activate the JAWS or Invisible Cursor and then use the ARROW keys and other standard reading commands to move around the screen while the system focus remained on the current control. The primary difference between the JAWS and Invisible Cursors is that the mouse pointer follows along with the JAWS Cursor so you can click items using the NUM PAD SLASH or NUM PAD STAR commands.

In order to access screen content with the JAWS and Invisible Cursors, we use a technology called the Off-Screen Model (OSM). However, in the last few years, an increasing number of applications are now using newer technologies such as User Interface Automation (UIA) to present screen content which made the JAWS and Invisible Cursor useless in these situations. When activating these cursors in applications like the Calculator, Weather, or most apps from the Microsoft Store, you would only hear “blank” when attempting to review the screen.

JAWS 2020 now detects when focus is in an application where the OSM is not supported and will automatically use the new JAWS or Invisible Scan Cursor in these situations. You will use all of the same navigation commands as you would with the traditional JAWS Cursor or the Invisible Cursors.

For example, if you press NUM PAD MINUS in the Weather app so you can review a forecast, you will now hear JAWS announce "JAWS Scan Cursor" as this is an app that does not support the OSM. Similarly, if you press NUM PAD Minus twice quickly, you will hear JAWS announce, “Invisible Scan Cursor.” You can then use the same commands you always have to review text with the difference being that you are now navigating through the UIA elements of the app.

For instance:

·         LEFT or RIGHT ARROW moves by character through the text of the current element.

·         CTRL+LEFT or CTRL+RIGHT ARROW moves by word.

·         UP or DOWN ARROW moves to the previous or next element or line of text.

·         HOME or END moves to the beginning or end of the current element.

·         CTRL+HOME or CTRL+END moves to the first or last element on the screen.

You can still use JAWS commands such as INSERT+UP ARROW to read the current element or line of text as well as CTRL+F to search for text currently visible on the screen. When using the JAWS Scan Cursor, the mouse pointer follows along as you navigate so you can still press NUM PAD SLASH or NUM PAD STAR to perform a left or right click.

Convenient OCR Updated to Use the Latest OmniPage

The recognition engine used by the JAWS Convenient OCR feature has been updated to Kofax OmniPage 20, formerly owned by Nuance. This offers greater accuracy when recognizing the text from on-screen images as well as text from images captured with a PEARL camera or scanner in a variety of languages.

Virtual Cursor Toggle Now Tab Specific in Google Chrome

Today, there are many web apps where using the Virtual Cursor is not the best approach. An example of this can be seen if you use Gmail in the Chrome Browser. In these cases, it makes sense to toggle the Virtual Cursor off by pressing INSERT+Z and then use this application with the PC cursor. Many users also regularly open multiple tabs (CTRL+T) so they can easily access different sites such as GMail plus one or two other pages by moving between the open tabs using CTRL+TAB. This can become frustrating as you need to constantly press INSERT+Z to get the right cursor in use as you switch between tabs.

Beginning with version 2020, we are introducing an option to help JAWS automatically remember the state of the Virtual Cursor for each tab once you set it. It will also announce whether the Virtual Cursor is on or off as you move between various tabs. Once you close the browser, or restart JAWS, it will default back to its default behavior so you will need to set this each day as you use it.

To toggle this feature, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+6 to open Settings Center.

2.    Press CTRL+SHIFT+D to load the default file.

3.    Type "Tab" in the search field.

4.    Press DOWN ARROW until you locate "Virtual Cursor On/Off based on Browser Tabs."

5.    Press the SPACEBAR to enable or disable the option and then select OK.

Contracted Braille Input Enhancements

For ElBraille users as well as those who regularly use a Braille display with their PC, JAWS 2020 offers significant improvements when typing in contracted Braille. In particular:

·         You should now be able to enter and edit text in numbered and bulleted lists in Word, WordPad, Outlook, and Windows Mail.

·         Contracted Braille input is now supported in more applications including PowerPoint and TextPad.

·         Improved Contracted Braille input in WordPad, especially when editing a numbered or bulleted list created in Word and opened in Wordpad. This includes properly handling wrapped items which previously showed the number or bullet on subsequent wrapped lines, rather than indenting the text.

·         Improved Contracted Braille input in Chrome, Google docs, and other online editors which can create bulleted and numbered lists.

·         Typing rapidly using Contracted Braille in Microsoft Office as well as other applications should no longer result in text becoming scrambled.

Updated JAWS Basic Training

For JAWS 2020, the nine books that make up the Basic Training have been updated and restructured to make them more concise and task oriented. The goal was to keep things simple, easy to follow, and generic so the training applies to more people in more situations. For instance, in the JAWS User Interface and Utilities book, we won't be trying to show everything in the UI as we did in the past. Instead, we point out the most important things and where to find them in both the menus and in the Utilities folder. This makes it easier for teachers, instructors, IT professionals, etc. to get an overview of where to find things quickly.

To update a book, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to open the JAWS application window.

2.    Press ALT+H to choose the Help menu, and then press ENTER to choose Training.

3.    FSReader opens and displays the JAWS Training Table of Contents which contains links to all of the available DAISY training books. Use the ARROW keys to navigate to the book you want to open and then press ENTER. If the book is not currently on your computer or an updated book is available, FSReader will automatically download and install it.

4.    Repeat this process for each book you want to download.

Note that several of the book titles have changed which required an update to the Table of Contents. The first time you select Training from the JAWS Help menu, you may be asked to update the Training Table of Contents book as well.

Toggle JAWS Sounds in Speech On Demand

Introduced in JAWS and Fusion 2018, Speech On Demand allows you to limit the amount of JAWS speech you hear as you navigate windows and documents or perform other actions using hot keys and is activated using a convenient layered keystroke (INSERT+SPACEBAR followed by S). For JAWS users who rely heavily on Braille or for users of Fusion that can see well enough to use the screen for tracking focus, too much speech can be overwhelming while navigating using the keyboard and mouse. By default, when using Speech On Demand, JAWS only announces actions for a limited set of screen reading keystrokes such as reading the current character, word, line, window title, and so on. Windows navigation commands such as moving to the next or previous character, line, or word do not speak. Refer to the Speech On Demand help topic for a full list of commands that provide speech in this mode.

JAWS and Fusion 2020 now allow you to specify whether or not JAWS generated sounds are heard when Speech On Demand is active. JAWS sounds include the sound heard when pressing INSERT+SPACEBAR to perform a layered keystroke as well as the sound heard when completing an address in Outlook. By default, JAWS sounds will continue to be heard. If you do not want to hear JAWS sounds when Speech On Demand is active or when speech is completely muted, open Settings Center, expand the Speech Options group, and clear the "Play JAWS Sounds" check box. You can customize other Speech On Demand settings in this group as well.

Filter Control Characters in Braille

Depending on the application you are using, control characters may be used to represent certain document elements like page breaks or line breaks. JAWS now allows you to configure whether or not these control characters are shown on the Braille display. By default, JAWS does not output these control characters in Braille to help provide a smoother reading experience. However, there may be times when having control characters displayed in Braille could be helpful when editing text.

To display control characters in Braille, open Settings Center, expand Text Processing, expand, Proofing, and clear the "Filter Control Characters such as Page Breaks" check box. Control characters will be displayed correctly for both Computer Braille and Contracted Braille output.

General Changes in Response to Customer Requests

·         By default, JAWS and Fusion now skip over blank lines while navigating using the Virtual Cursor. This improves reading when navigating web pages, PDF documents, Help Files, and the JAWS Results Viewer without announcing all the blank lines. If you want to hear blank lines as you navigate text, open Settings Center (INSERT+6) and clear the "Skip Blank Lines While Navigating" check box.

·         Added a new Quick Settings (INSERT+V) option called "Announce Count of Links, Headings, etc. when page loads," which is on by default. Turning this setting off causes JAWS and Fusion not to announce the number of these elements when a web page loads.

·         While browsing the internet, JAWS will no longer announce "Clickable" by default as you move to various content.

·         You should no longer hear the message "Press JAWS Key+ALT+R to hear descriptive text" as you navigate form controls and certain other elements on the web.

·         Removed extraneous "Insert F1 Help" announcements that were heard when navigating through various controls on the web.

·         In Excel, Added a new "Blank Cell Announcement" option in Quick Settings (INSERT+V) for JAWS and Fusion previously only available in MAGic. Turn this setting off if you do not want to hear "blank" in addition to the cell coordinates when encountering empty cells as you navigate. The content of cells is only spoken if they actually contain data.

·         By default in Word and Outlook, JAWS will no longer announce "Alt SHIFT F10 to adjust Auto Correction" when you move to something that was auto corrected previously.

·         JAWS and Fusion will no longer gather and announce the count of all the objects, misspellings, grammatical errors, and so on when a document is opened in Word. This will enable documents to load much faster, including very large documents containing a lot of these items. You can always press INSERT+F1 for an overview of what the document contains.

·         Improved responsiveness when closing Word after saving a document.

·         The AutoCorrect Detection option, previously only available in the Quick Settings for Word, can now also be changed in the Quick Settings for Outlook (INSERT+V).

·         Pressing INSERT+W while focused in PowerPoint now displays a list of useful PowerPoint hot keys.

Updated BraillePen Display Driver

Added an updated driver from Harpo in Poland to support their New BraillePen 14 Braille device in addition to the previously supported BraillePen 12T. Now, all models are supported by this driver.

Improved JAWS and Fusion Installation for Multi-Lingual Computers and Applications

When performing a full installation of JAWS or Fusion 2020 on computers offering multiple languages for Windows or specific applications like Office, you now have the opportunity to install additional JAWS languages to match the available operating system or application languages. This makes it more convenient for agencies and other groups using multi-lingual systems as they can easily switch the JAWS user interface language to match the current operating system language without having to uninstall and install a different version of JAWS.

On the main setup screen, choose the Options button to display a list of available JAWS languages for installation. Use the SPACEBAR to select the languages you want to install and then select OK to continue. Once JAWS is installed, Use the Language menu in the JAWS application window to switch between languages. Before switching the JAWS language, make sure you have configured Windows to use the matching language. Otherwise, JAWS keystrokes and other features may not work as expected.

Note: This is not recommended for users who just want to read web pages or documents in a secondary language. For these users, you only need to install additional voices for that language and allow JAWS or Fusion to switch automatically. Changing the User Interface of JAWS to a language other than that of the Operating System will create problems trying to navigate and work with applications in the primary language.

Last updated on February 26, 2020

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

System Requirements

The system requirements for JAWS are listed below.
 

+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Specification                     | Minimum Requirement                                                                                                                                                                |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Operating System                  | Windows® 10, Windows 8.1, Windows 7 Service Pack 1, Windows Server® 2019, Windows Server 2016, Windows Server 2012, and Windows Server 2008                                        |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Processor speed                   | Minimum 1.5 GHz processor                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Memory (RAM)                      | Minimum 4 GB (64-bit)                                                                                                                                                              |
|                                   |  Minimum 2 GB (32-bit)                                                                                                                                                             |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Required hard disk space          | 1.6 GB required during installation                                                                                                                                                |
|                                   |  20 MB to 690 MB required per voice for installing Vocalizer Expressive, Vocalizer Direct, or RealSpeak Solo Direct voices (file sizes will vary depending on the voice installed) |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Video                             | A display adapter capable of at least 800 x 600 screen resolution with 16-bit color (1024 x 768 screen resolution with 32-bit color recommended)                                   |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sound                             | Windows compatible sound card (for speech)                                                                                                                                         |
+-----------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Installing JAWS

Note: You must have an active internet connection as well as be logged on to an account with administrator privileges to install JAWS.

If you have not already downloaded JAWS, you can get it from the Freedom Scientific website. Once the download is complete, navigate to where you saved the executable file, select it, and press ENTER.

The JAWS setup program starts. You will hear the installation speak the instructions as they appear on your screen. Follow these instructions to complete the JAWS installation. Once installation is complete, you must restart your computer before using JAWS.

Installing the JAWS Training Materials

Freedom Scientific offers Basic Training and other training materials in DAISY format. You can listen to and read the training modules by using the FSReader DAISY reader included with JAWS. To install these training materials, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to open the JAWS application window.

2.    Press ALT+H to choose the Help menu, and then press ENTER to choose Training.

3.    FSReader opens and displays the JAWS Training Table of Contents which contains links to all of the available DAISY training books. Use the ARROW keys to navigate to the book you want to download and install and then press ENTER. FSReader will automatically download and install the book and then open it.

4.    Repeat this process for each book you want to download.

Installing Vocalizer Expressive Voices

JAWS includes a utility that makes it easy to seamlessly sample and install or remove Vocalizer Expressive 2 premium voices. Vocalizer Expressive provides more natural-sounding speech in a variety of voices and languages. Once installed, these voices will also work with other Freedom Scientific software products including ZoomText and Fusion. To install Vocalizer Expressive voices, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to open the JAWS application window.

2.    Press ALT+O to open the Options menu, expand the Voices submenu, and then select Add/Remove Voices to open the Add/Remove Vocalizer Expressive Voices utility.

3.    In the Select a Language combo box, select the language that you want to download voices for.

4.    In the Premium Voices list box, press the SPACEBAR on the voices you want to install. You can select as many voices as you like. To hear a sample of the current voice before deciding if you want to select it, press ALT+P.

5.    Select the Install Selected Voices button to begin the installation.

Repairing JAWS

If you experience problems running JAWS or if you cannot successfully check for or install updates, you can repair your installation of JAWS. Repairing JAWS can resolve a number of issues quickly. To repair your installation of JAWS, do the following:

1.    Download the latest version of JAWS from the Freedom Scientific Web site.

2.    Navigate to the folder where the JAWS setup package is located.

3.    Select the setup package file and press ENTER

4.    When the JAWS Repair dialog box displays, press ENTER to begin the repair.

Special Installation Commands

There are a number of special installation commands that may be helpful to network administrators. To install JAWS using these options, do the following:

1.    Press WINDOWS Key+R.

2.    Choose the Browse button.

3.    Navigate to the folder where the JAWS setup package is located.

4.    Select the setup package file and press ENTER.

5.    Press END and then press the SPACEBAR.

6.    Type one of the following:

o   /Help or /MoreHelp - Displays a dialog box containing additional information about the available command line arguments.

o   /ExtractSettings <Path-to-file> - Outputs the contents of Settings.ini to the output file specified. The installation process is not performed. If the output file already exists, it is overwritten. If there are spaces in the path to the file, the path must be enclosed in quotes (for example: C:\Package.exe /ExtractSettings "C:\FS setup\OldSettings.ini" ).

o   /ReplaceSettings <Path-to-file> - Specifies an initialization file for the setup package engine to use instead of the Settings.ini file stored in the resources. This flag can be used if any of the contents in Settings.ini must be overridden. If there are spaces in the path to the file, the path must be enclosed in quotes (for example: C:\Package.exe /ReplaceSettings "C:\FS setup\NewSettings.ini" ).

o   /Layout <Path-to-file> - Downloads the non-embedded installer files and creates a copy of the setup package in the folder specified. This allows a user to run the setup package and perform an installation or repair on an offline computer. To do this, the setup package and installer files must be in the same folder. If there are spaces in the path to the file, the path must be enclosed in quotes (for example: C:\Package.exe /Layout "C:\FS setup\OfflineSetup\" ). The installer files are downloaded to the c:\\FS setup\\OfflineSetup folder.

o   /Log - By default, JAWS outputs the installation process to several log files. These files are created in the user Temp directory in a folder named for the build. Use this command to specify a different folder location for saving JAWS log files.

o   /Type Silent - Silently installs a typical installation of JAWS without displaying any installation dialog boxes or prompts.

o   /Type Repair - Repairs a typical installation of JAWS. Once the repair begins, you will not be able to cancel the operation. During the repair, progress dialogs are displayed and a clicking tone is played. At the end, you will be prompted to restart your computer

o   /Type SilentRepair - Silently repairs an existing JAWS installation without displaying any installation dialog boxes or prompts.

o   /Type Uninstall - Uninstalls an existing installation of JAWS.

o   /Type SilentUninstall - Silently uninstalls an existing installation of JAWS without removing shared components.

o   /Type SilentSharedUninstall - Silently uninstalls an existing installation of JAWS and the shared components.

7.    Press ENTER.

Roaming User Profiles

A user profile contains user settings, such as your printer configurations, e-mail and application preferences, shortcuts, and Web browser favorites. A roaming user profile, which is configured by a network administrator, lets you log on to any computer within a domain and still access your user settings and documents.

JAWS supports Microsoft's roaming user profiles model. This means that your JAWS preferences can be copied to a shared folder and retrieved by you as you access any computer within your group. When you log off the computer, your profile and changes are copied from your local Users folder back to the shared folder.

Before you can use a roaming profile, a network administrator must complete the following tasks:

·         Create a shared folder that will store the roaming profiles

·         Configure the user accounts to use roaming profiles

Uninstalling JAWS

To uninstall JAWS, open the Windows Control Panel and select Programs and Features. Select JAWS in the list and then choose Uninstall.

During the uninstall process, you can choose to remove shared components or user settings files by selecting the appropriate check boxes.

Shared Components

Shared components refer to DAISY training materials, video drivers, and other components that are shared between different versions of JAWS, as well as among several other Freedom Scientific products, such as MAGic.

If you have another version of JAWS, or other Freedom Scientific products, installed on your computer, it is recommended that you choose not to remove shared components. If you remove them, your other Freedom Scientific products will no longer have all the necessary files. If you have no other Freedom Scientific products or versions of JAWS on your system, it is recommended that you choose to remove the shared components.

User Settings

User settings files are configuration files, scripts, and other settings that you have customized or created. If you select the check box to delete user settings, the files are deleted. Otherwise, the files are retained in the following location:

·         C:\Users\User Name\AppData\Roaming\Freedom Scientific\JAWS\Version Number\Settings\ENU

Note: If you want to keep any customized or modified script files saved in your user settings folder, it is recommended that you copy those scripts to a folder outside of the JAWS installation folder before uninstalling the program.

Note: Shared settings files are always removed.

See also:

Activating JAWS Migrate Settings
 JAWS Startup Wizard

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Activating JAWS

Note: This section applies to perpetual licenses (Professional and Home). If you have an Annual license, you can skip to the next section.

When you first install and start JAWS, you are asked to activate the program. You can use Internet License Manager (ILM) to activate JAWS using an Internet connection. This is the easiest and quickest way to activate your product. If you do not have Internet access, you can activate manually by telephone, fax, or by visiting www.FSActivate.com.

If you do not activate at this time, JAWS runs in 40-minute mode, which requires a computer reboot every 40 minutes. The activation process can be started later by opening the Help menu, opening the License submenu, and choosing Update Activation.

The following sections describe the various ways to activate JAWS.

Standard Activation

To activate JAWS using the Internet, do the following:

1.    In the Activation dialog box, choose Start Activation.

2.    Read the message that displays and then use the ARROW keys to select Internet (RECOMMENDED), and then press ENTER.

3.    If your 20-digit Authorization number is not automatically displayed, type it into the Authorization Number edit box.

4.    Press ENTER to continue. You will be asked to connect to the Internet if you have not already done so. You must establish an Internet connection before continuing with the activation.

5.    If you have not registered JAWS, you are asked to do so now. Registering JAWS lets you receive technical support. Choose Register Now and complete the online registration form by following the instructions provided. You can choose to register later, but you must register the next time you activate JAWS.

6.    After you submit your registration, Internet License Manager attempts to activate JAWS. This process may take several minutes. When the activation is successful, choose Finish.

Note: If Internet License Manager cannot activate JAWS because of your firewall software, see Troubleshooting Firewall Software.

Note: If you need to request more activations, go to www.FSActivate.com.

Other Activation Methods

To activate JAWS using a different method, do the following:

1.    In the Activation dialog box, choose Start Activation.

2.    Select Manual, by telephone, fax, or fsactivate.com, and choose Next.

3.    Follow the instructions that display in subsequent Activation dialog boxes.

Dongle Authorization

A dongle is a hardware device that you can connect to a computer's USB port. One dongle can be used to authorize all Freedom Scientific software products (JAWS, Fusion, and ZoomText). The software is authorized to run on that computer as long as the dongle remains connected. Dongles are useful if you are a trainer or consultant where you frequently use Freedom Scientific software on many different computers as you do not have to worry about activation.

When JAWS starts, it first determines whether a dongle is connected to the computer. If one is connected, JAWS uses the features and information for the license associated with the dongle to authorize JAWS. If no dongle is connected, JAWS searches for the license information stored on the computer. You can use the Dongle Viewer utility to view information on the license associated with the dongle currently connected to your computer. To start this utility, go to the Utilities menu located in the JAWS main window, choose "Explore Utilities Folder", and select Dongle Viewer.

Note: It is recommended that you do not connect the dongle to your computer until after you install JAWS. If the dongle was connected before or during installation, you must restart your computer to receive proper authorization.

Dongles are sold separately as an add-on for ILM perpetual licenses of JAWS and Fusion Professional and Home, as well as for ZoomText. Contact Freedom Scientific Sales if you want to purchase one. Dongles are not available for adding to a Home Annual license.

Note: Certain international versions of JAWS require a dongle for authorization. Using one of these versions without a dongle displays an error message.

Network Authorization

For locations with multiple client computers on an inter-connected network, a network license server is the preferred authorization method. Using this method, computers connect to the network license server for authorization. If you purchased a network (multi-user) license of JAWS, refer to the Network Authorization Instructions topic for information on installing the license server and activating your software.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Migrate Settings

After a new version of JAWS is installed and activated, if a previous version containing custom user settings is detected, a dialog box displays asking if you want to migrate these settings to the current version. Select the prior JAWS version you want to migrate settings from and choose Yes. The current version of JAWS will now use the custom settings from the previous version without the need for you to manually configure settings. Once the settings have been migrated, a dialog box opens where you can configure JAWS startup options. This dialog box contains the same options found in the Start JAWS Options dialog box, which is accessed through the Basic Settings dialog box. Once you have confirmed how you want JAWS to start, choose OK to save and close the dialog box.

Note: Settings from versions of JAWS earlier than version 17 cannot be migrated.

If you do not want to migrate settings from a previous version of JAWS, choose No when asked if you want to migrate settings. The Startup Wizard launches, enabling you to configure some of the more commonly used JAWS options. You can migrate settings at a later time by doing the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to access the JAWS application window and then press ALT+U to open the Utilities menu.

2.    From the Utilities menu, open the Import/Export submenu and select Migrate Settings. The Migrate User Settings dialog box opens.

3.    Select the prior JAWS version you want to migrate settings from and choose Yes.

Note: Versions of JAWS earlier than JAWS 17 will not be listed.

4.    A warning message is displayed stating that migrating settings will completely delete any existing user settings and you are asked if you want to continue. Choose Yes to migrate settings from the prior version or choose No if you do not want to migrate settings at this time.

5.    If you chose to migrate your settings, a dialog box opens and displays the results of the migration process. After reviewing this information, choose OK to close the dialog box.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

JAWS Startup Wizard

The JAWS Startup Wizard is a helpful tool that contains a series of dialog boxes. It lets you quickly configure some of the more commonly used JAWS parameters. This can save time since you do not have to search multiple menus and managers to customize your copy of JAWS.

The Startup Wizard automatically runs the first time you install a new version of JAWS unless you chose to migrate settings from an earlier version. The Startup Wizard can also be launched at any time by pressing INSERT+J to access the JAWS application window, ALT+H to open the Help menu, and choosing Startup Wizard.

Note: You must choose the Finish button in the wizard's last dialog box to save and activate any changes. If you cancel or escape at any point in the wizard, your changes will not be saved.

Help Us Improve Freedom Scientific Products

Select the Participate check box on this page to allow Freedom Scientific to collect anonymous usage information as you use the software. To learn more, see the Help Improve Freedom Scientific Products help topic.

Speech Settings 

The following options appear for the Speech Settings.

Rate

This scroll bar allows you to adjust the rate of speech for JAWS. Press LEFT ARROW, DOWN ARROW, or PAGE DOWN to decrease the speech rate. Press RIGHT ARROW, UP ARROW, or PAGE UP to increase the speech rate. The default rate is 57.

Punctuation

This combo box allows you to specify how much punctuation JAWS speaks. Available options are None, Some, Most, and All. The default setting is Most.

Typing Echo

This group box allows you to select to have the information you type echoed in one of several ways. The default is to echo your typing by character. Set your preferences by selecting one of four radio buttons:

·         Off: Select this option if you do not wish to hear typing echoed.

·         Characters: Each character you type is echoed. This is the default setting.

·         Words: Each word you type is echoed after pressing SPACEBAR or ENTER.

·         Characters and Words: Characters are echoed as you type them and words are echoed after you press SPACEBAR or ENTER.

Lower the Volume of Other Programs While JAWS is Speaking

When this check box is selected, the volume for all programs will be reduced while JAWS is speaking. This check box is cleared by default and is only available if JAWS is running in Windows 8 or later.

Run JAWS Settings 

The following options appear for the Run JAWS Settings.

Automatically Start JAWS

Having JAWS start automatically, which is also known as running JAWS as a service, is a great help to those who require speech immediately. Use these settings to determine if JAWS starts before or after you log on and start Windows.

Note: The default values of the Start JAWS Option dialog box assure that JAWS is always loaded and running before and after you start Windows. If you have an Administrator account, three options appear. If you have a Standard User account, only the Start JAWS after log on for this user combo box appears. There is no need to change the default values.

·         Automatically start JAWS at the Log On screen: When this check box is selected, JAWS will load and start when the Windows log on screen appears. The check box is selected by default.
 
 Administrator rights are required to change this setting. If you have Standard user rights, you cannot change the value of this check box, and you will not hear it using JAWS. Clear this check box if you want JAWS to be off when the log on screen appears. The check box value applies to all users who log on to this version of JAWS on this computer.

·         Automatically start JAWS after log on for all users: When this check box is selected, JAWS will load and start after you log on to Windows. It is cleared by default.

Note: The only time that it is necessary to change the value of this check box is if you have an Administrator account on this computer, and you want to control how JAWS starts for all subsequent users who log on to Windows using this computer. If you do not have Administrator rights, you cannot change the value of this check box, and you will not hear it using JAWS.
 
 If you have Standard user rights on this computer, refer to the combo box labeled Start JAWS after log on for this user for information that describes how to start JAWS after logging on to Windows.

·         Start JAWS after log on for this user: This combo box allows an individual user to control if JAWS starts after he or she logs on to Windows. This combo box has three values: Always, Never, and Using the All Users Setting. The default value is Always.

Note: This combo box is available to users with Administrator and Standard user rights. The value selected for the combo box overrides the value of the Automatically start JAWS after log on for all users check box.
 
 If Always is selected, JAWS will start every time the current user logs on to Windows.
 
 If Never is selected, JAWS will never start after the current user logs-on to Windows.
 
 If the current user selects the value labeled Using the All Users Setting, then the following can happen:
 
 JAWS will start after the current user logs on if the Administrator selected the Automatically start JAWS after log on for all users check box.
 
 JAWS will not start after the current user logs on if the Administrator cleared the Automatically start JAWS after log on for all users check box.

Run JAWS from System Tray

This option removes JAWS from the TAB order and places it in the system tray. This change takes effect the next time you start JAWS. To access JAWS from the system tray, press INSERT+J. This brings up a shortcut menu with the Options, Utilities, Languages, and Help items listed. Press RIGHT ARROW to access sub-menus for each of these items. Press ALT to close this shortcut menu.

This check box is not selected by default.

Prompt to Confirm When Exiting JAWS

Select this check box to have JAWS prompt you on exit giving you an opportunity to cancel that action. When cleared, JAWS immediately closes when you use any of the commands to exit the program including INSERT+F4. This option is selected by default.

Common Options

The following options appear for the Common Options.

Smart Navigation

Smart Navigation offers a more efficient way to navigate in web-based applications, tables, and forms. Use this combo box to select the level of Smart Navigation to use.

When set to "Controls," most controls are treated as single units when navigating by character or word, like moving through a menu bar with RIGHT and LEFT ARROW. When set to "Controls and Tables," controls are treated as single units when navigating by character or word, while inside a table, the ARROW keys move between cells. In either case, you can always get to traditional navigation such as character or word, by pressing the Say Character, Say Word, or Say Line commands twice quickly so you can explore the text of the control in more traditional ways. To return to Smart Navigation, just press DOWN ARROW, ESC, or TAB.

Anytime you are using Smart Navigation, JAWS will work in what is referred to as "Document Presentation Screen Layout". This offers a much more natural movement through pages the way they appear on screen. As you navigate by line on web pages, you will also notice a sound indication if the current line contains one or more links which would generally be displayed on separate lines when you are not in Smart Navigation. This sound will help you identify that a link exists and give you a chance to pause to hear about it or use TAB or the ARROW keys to move to it.

Smart Navigation is off by default.

Forms Mode

Forms Mode is needed when working with HTML content in a browser and you need to input information. Since JAWS uses a "Virtual Mode" to navigate, you can normally press letters to navigate between Headings, Paragraphs, Tables, etc. But when you need to type in text or use the ARROW keys to select items in a Combo Box, you need another mode refered to as Forms Mode. Use this group of radio buttons to select how you wish to get in and out of Forms Mode.

When set to Auto, JAWS automatically enters Forms Mode when you press TAB, SHIFT+TAB, or the ARROW keys to move to a control that requires Forms Mode in order to interact with it, such as an edit field or combo box. To indicate you have entered Forms Mode, you will hear a "pop" sound, or you can use the status cells in Braille. When you finish working with a control, you can press ESC to exit Forms Mode, or press UP or DOWN ARROW to move away from the control and exit Forms Mode. This functionality can be very useful for new and sighted JAWS users and is the default setting.

Selecting Manual prevents JAWS from ever putting you into forms mode as you navigate using any of the commands including the TAB Key. This means that when you move into an edit field or combo box control, you must press ENTER first to type text or select a value. To manually exit Forms Mode, press NUM PAD PLUS or ESC.

Semi-auto is a mode in between Auto and Manual. You will only enter Forms Mode if you land on a control while navigating with TAB or SHIFT+TAB. Forms Mode will not be activated if you navigate with the ARROW keys or Navigation Quick Keys. You must manually exit Forms Mode when Semi-auto is active. Semi-auto and Manual Forms Mode may be better suited for experienced users.

For users of Smart Navigation, it is recommend users switch Forms Mode to either Semi-Auto or Manual for the best experience.

Note: When Forms Mode is on, Say Line or Say All reads all text on the current line. This includes labels and descriptions.

Use Virtual Ribbon Menu

Select this check box to turn on the Virtual Ribbon Menu. The Virtual Ribbon Menu provides predictable navigation, lets you see everything in the Ribbon, and offers consistency when navigating with ARROW Keys. It is off by default. When it is on, the Ribbon is navigated using a traditional menu and submenu format familiar to most JAWS users.

To move between tabs on the Upper Ribbon, press LEFT ARROW or RIGHT ARROW.

To move to the Lower Ribbon of the current tab, press DOWN ARROW.

To leave the Upper Ribbon and return to the document, press ESC or ALT. 

If a keystroke sequence that uses ALT combined with a letter to invoke a command is available for an application, JAWS uses that keystroke; and the Virtual Ribbon Menu does not appear.

This check box is cleared by default. Note that the Virtual Ribbon Menu can also be turned on or off using Settings Center.

Use Keyboard Layout

Use this combo box to select the desired keyboard layout. Select from desktop, laptop, or kinesis. JAWS keystrokes frequently use keys located on the numeric keypad, which usually is on the right side of the keyboard. Most laptop computers do not have the numeric keypad, so JAWS provides alternate keystrokes, called laptop keystrokes. If your keyboard has the numeric keypad, choose the desktop keyboard option. For those of you who are using any of the Kinesis keyboards, select kinesis as this implements the features of these keyboards. If your keyboard does not have a numeric keypad, choose the laptop keyboard option.

Initial State of NUM LOCK Key

JAWS uses the numeric keypad to perform numerous speech functions.  By default, the NUM LOCK key is turned off so that you can easily use these functions.  However, you may have a job that requires extensive use of the numeric keypad, in which case, you must always turn on the NUM LOCK key after JAWS starts.

The Initial State of NUM LOCK Key option allows you to control whether or not the NUM LOCK key is enabled when JAWS starts. This option is only available in Default.jcf.

·         Turn off at startup: This is the default value.  When selected, the NUM LOCK key is off when JAWS starts.

·         Turn on at startup: Enables the NUM LOCK key so that it is on when JAWS starts.

·         Do not modify: JAWS uses the current NUM LOCK key setting.

Verbosity Settings

The following options appear for the Verbosity Settings.

Tutor Messages

Use this series of radio buttons to determine which Tutor messages are spoken. Tutor messages provide navigation tips in applications and Windows.

·         Turn Off Menu and Control Help: No Tutor messages are spoken.

·         Announce Menu and Control Help: All Tutor messages are spoken. This is the default setting.

·         Announce Custom Messages Only: Only custom Tutor messages added through Prompt Manager are spoken.

Access Keys

Access keys are the keys you press to move directly to a control or an item in a menu. Use this group of radio buttons to specify which access keys are announced:

·         Off: No access keys are spoken.

·         Speak all: JAWS speaks access keys for both menus and dialog boxes. This is the default setting.

·         Speak Menus Only: JAWS only speaks access keys for menu items.

·         Speak Dialogs Only: JAWS only speaks access keys for controls in dialog boxes.

Verbosity Level

There are three levels of verbosity: Beginner, Intermediate, and Advanced. The beginner level provides the maximum amount of information spoken, while intermediate and advanced levels provide fewer details. Beginner is the default setting.

Graphic Verbosity 

This series of radio buttons allows you to determine if JAWS announces when graphics are encountered, and which graphics are announced.

·         No Graphics: If this option is selected, JAWS does not announce graphics as they are encountered.

·         Labeled Graphics: If this option is selected, JAWS only announces graphics that have been labeled with the graphics labeler.

·         All Graphics: If this option is selected, JAWS announces all graphics as they are encountered. JAWS reads the labels for the graphics, if they are assigned. If no labels are assigned for a graphic, JAWS assigns a unique number. This is the default option.

Braille Translation Settings

The following options appear for the Braille Translation Settings.

Language

Select a braille language from the list. JAWS can display braille in a variety of languages. By default, the language is set to English - United States.

Output

Use this combo box to configure the output mode for reading Braille on your display. The first option is always Computer Braille. The other available options depend on the currently selected language. For example, when the language is set to English United States, the available output modes are U.S. English Grade 1, U.S. English Grade 2, Unified English Braille Grade 1, and Unified English Braille Grade 2. If you set the language to French, the available modes are French Grade 1 and French Grade 2. The default output mode is Computer Braille.

Input

Use this combo box to specify the input mode used when typing Braille from the Perkins-style keyboard on your display. The first option is always Computer Braille. The other available option depends on the currently selected output mode. For instance, if you have chosen to display Unified English Braille Grade 2, then you can choose to type in either Computer Braille or Unified English Braille Grade 2. The default input mode is Computer Braille. This setting is not available if the selected output mode is Computer Braille, or the selected output mode does not support input.

Show Current Word in Computer Braille

Select this check box to have the word at the current cursor position display in computer braille. Clear this check box to display the word in contracted braille. The check box is selected by default. The Show Current Word in Computer Braille check box is available only when the output mode is Grade 1 or Grade 2 and the input mode is Computer Braille.

Braille Settings

The following options appear for the Braille Settings.

Braille Mode

This combo box is used to determine the format of the information sent to the braille display. The following options are available:

·         Line: In this mode, the line of text at the current cursor position is sent to the braille display.

·         Structured: In this mode, information relevant to the current cursor position is sent to the braille display. The information sent includes things such as control type, dialog name, or number of items in a list. This is the default setting.

·         Speech Output: In this mode, the same information is sent to the braille display as is sent to the synthesizer.

Enable Flash Messages

Select this check box if you want JAWS to announce information by using Braille Flash Messages. These are short announcements that appear on your braille display for a few seconds. Clear this check box to turn off Braille Flash Messages. This option is selected by default.

Enable Word Wrap

If you select this check box, JAWS does not split a word that is too large to be shown on the braille display. When you pan to the next increment, you can read the word in its entirety. If you clear this check box, JAWS displays as much of the word as possible, but a portion may be cut off. JAWS shows the remainder of the word when you pan to the next increment. This check box is selected by default.

Reverse Panning Buttons

Select this check box to switch the direction of left and right panning buttons on a braille display. This means that when you press a left Navrow or panning button, panning advances to the right. Likewise, when you press a right Navrow or panning button, panning advances to the left. Clear this check box to restore normal panning operation. This check box is cleared by default.

Placement of Status Cells

Specify if the informational status cells on the Focus display are located on the left or right end of the display, or choose to not display them at all. The status cells are located at the left end of the display by default.

Dot Firmness

Specify the firmness of the braille dots on the Focus or PAC Mate display. There are five levels of firmness. Adjust the display to the level of firmness most suited to the sensitivity of your fingers. The default setting is 100 percent.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Updating JAWS

Freedom Scientific is continually seeking to improve and expand JAWS for Windows. Periodically, updates to JAWS will be released. It is recommended that you keep your software up-to-date so that you experience the greatest possible performance.

Checking for Updates

Note: When JAWS starts, it can alert you if a software update is available. You then have the option to install it now or later. This notification method is controlled using the Automatic Notification of Updates check box. To access the check box, choose Basics in the Options menu. It is selected by default. If you turn off automatic notification, you must manually check for updates as described below.

Updating your software is quick and easy. To search for updates to JAWS, do the following:

1.    Establish a connection to the Internet.

2.    Start JAWS.

3.    From the Help menu, choose Check for Updates.

4.    JAWS searches the Internet for updates and displays a list of any that are available to download. Use the arrow keys to move through the list, and press the SPACEBAR to select the check box next to any updates that you want to download and install.

Note: If your computer has active firewall software (such as Windows Firewall), you may receive a warning indicating that either the FSAutoUpdate Application or FSAutoUpdate.exe is attempting to access the Internet. You must allow this process to access the Internet through the firewall in order to retrieve updates. If you are using Windows Firewall, you can do this by choosing the Unblock button when the warning message displays. For other firewall software, refer to the product's documentation. The firewall must allow JAWS to access the Internet using ports 20 and 21 or port 80.

5.    When you are finished selecting updates, choose the Install button. You may be required to restart your computer. If the updates are not installed successfully, repair your installation of JAWS and then try the procedure again.

Downloading Special Updates

Some users will be provided with a Freedom Scientific access code so that they can download special or private beta versions of JAWS. To search for these special updates, do the following:

1.    Establish a connection to the Internet.

2.    Start JAWS.

3.    From the Help menu, choose About JAWS.

4.    Choose the Special Update Code button.

5.    Type your Freedom Scientific special update code in the edit box and then press ENTER.

6.    From the Help menu, choose Check for Updates and follow the procedure described in the previous section to download and install updates.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Help!

JAWS provides a variety of ways to get help. JAWS tries to help you by providing information as you use your computer. To learn more about JAWS Help, follow the links below.

Using JAWS Help

Help at Your Fingertips

Tutor Mode

Virtual Viewer

JAWS Training Materials (in DAISY format)

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Using JAWS Help

JAWS help is accessed from the JAWS application window by pressing F1. The help window is a split window that contains the contents of the various topics on the right side. The left side of the window contains the Table of Contents (ALT+C), Index (ALT+N), and Search (ALT+S) tabs. Press CTRL+TAB or the access keys to switch between these tabs. Which ever of these tab pages is in use when you close the help window will be active the next time you access help.

Information is provided in the following sections to assist you in using this help system.

Using The Table of Contents

Using the Index

Using Search

Using the Topic Window

Conventions

Using The Table of Contents (ALT+C)

When you first open the JAWS help system, the Table of Contents is displayed on the left side of a split window. The Table of Contents lists a number of books and pages. Books are categories containing a number of pages. The pages are topics containing information. UP ARROW and DOWN ARROW are used to move through the Table of Contents. RIGHT ARROW is used to open a book. LEFT ARROW is used to close a book. Press ENTER on a selected page to access the text of that topic, and then press F6 to move to the topic window. Press F6 to return to the Table of Contents,or press ALT+C to return to the Table of Contents from any section of the help system.

Using the Index (ALT+N)

Press ALT+N to move to the Index. Type in keywords to locate related topics. Keywords are help related terms or concepts. After typing in a keyword, press UP ARROW or DOWN ARROW to move through a list of matching index entries. Press ENTER to select a keyword. If there is only one matching topic, it is displayed in the topic window. Press F6 to move to the topic window. If there are multiple matching topics, they are displayed in a list. Select a topic from the list, press ENTER, then press F6 to move to the topic window.

Using Search (ALT+S)

Press ALT+S to move to the Search page. Type in the word or phrase you are looking for, and then press TAB to move to the List Topics Button. Press ENTER, and then press TAB to move to the list of topics.

Use the arrow keys to locate topics and press ENTER to open them. Press F6 to move to the topic window.

Using The Topic Window (F6)

Once you select a page in the Table of Contents, Index, or Search window and press ENTER to open it, press F6 to switch to the Topic window.

Navigate through the text and links in the topic in the same manner as you would navigate on a web page. Read by line, sentence, or paragraph. Press ENTER on links to follow them. For more information on available navigation features, see Internet Explorer.

Conventions

A shortcut key can be a single key on the keyboard or several keys that are pressed in combination. In this help system, the plus sign (+) indicates when keys are to be pressed in combination. For example, INSERT+RIGHT ARROW can be used to read the next word in a document.

Shortcut keys can also consist of sequences of pressed keys, where some keys are pressed and released, and then other keys are pressed. A comma (,) indicates when keys are to be pressed one after the other. For example: ALT+F, X can be used to close many applications. In this example, press ALT and F together, release the keys, and then press X.

When referring to shortcut keys that require the use of the number pad, the word NUM PAD always precedes that shortcut key. For example: INSERT+NUM PAD 5. If the shortcut key does not say NUM PAD, use the number from the number row.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Help at Your Fingertips

The following commands provide quick access to Help as you use JAWS.

Keyboard Help - INSERT+1 

Turn on this feature to explore JAWS commands. As you press key combinations, JAWS tells you which keyboard commands do what, safely - without actually performing the command. Press INSERT+1 again to exit keyboard help.

Screen Sensitive Help - INSERT+F1

Press INSERT+F1 and JAWS provides messages that describe the current control or window. Screen Sensitive Messages will appear in the Virtual Viewer, from which you can follow links to other related topics.

Read Control and Help - INSERT+TAB 

INSERT+TAB speaks the tutor message for the current control or window, and the access key to move directly to that control, if one exists. Using this keystroke is a great way to review tutor and access key information without moving away from a control and back, and without needing to turn on automatic announcement of these messages.

Windows Key Help - INSERT+W

Windows Key Help presents a message that lists Windows hot keys that you may find helpful within the context in which you are presently working. Windows Key Messages will appear in the Virtual Viewer.

 

Hot Key Help - INSERT+H 

Hot Key Help presents a message in the Virtual Viewer that lists JAWS hot keys that you may find helpful within the context in which you are working.

Screen Sensitive Help Technical - CTRL+INSERT+F1 

When writing JAWS scripts, use this keystroke to display a message in the Virtual Viewer that lists the Control ID, Class, and Handle information for the current control.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Virtual Viewer

The Virtual Viewer is a message window allowing you much greater functionality with many JAWS messages. Press INSERT+F1 to experience a message in the Virtual Viewer. While INSERT+F1 messages are the messages most frequently displayed in the Virtual Viewer, other messages appear there as well:

·         Hot Key Help Messages (INSERT+H)

·         Windows Key Help messages (INSERT+W)

·         Screen Sensitive Help Technical messages (CTRL+INSERT+F1)

·         Several types of informational messages within Microsoft Office applications

Easily review information with standard reading commands. Read by line, word, or character. Select text as you would in any word processing program and copy it to the clipboard. Press CTRL+HOME or CTRL+END to move to the top or bottom of the message.

Links take you to other messages or activate commands within your applications or within Windows. Press ENTER to select a link, or press INSERT+F7 to list all links in a message and select the one you want from the list.

Press ESC to close a message, or just TAB to the next control in a dialog and the message closes automatically. The following commands also perform their normal actions and automatically close the Virtual Viewer: SHIFT+TAB, CTRL+TAB, F1, INSERT+J, INSERT+F1+F1, CTRL+ESC.

By default, messages are visible on the screen in the Virtual Viewer, and this is very helpful for sighted trainers. However, the Virtual Viewer can be set so it is not visible on the screen. Change this in the Basic Settings Dialog under the Options menu in the JAWS application window, or in the User group in Settings Center.

If you want the Virtual Viewer visible in some applications, but not others, do the following:

1.    Open Settings Center (INSERT+F2) and select an application in the Applications combo box.

2.    Expand the User group.

3.    Select or clear the Show Virtual Viewer on Screen check box to toggle the Virtual Viewer setting on or off.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Tutor Mode

Tutor messages provide navigation tips in Windows and applications. Tutor messages are spoken in a different voice than other JAWS messages. An example of a common tutor message is after pressing the ALT key to access the JAWS menu bar, you will hear, "To move through items press LEFT or RIGHT ARROW." You can activate or deactivate JAWS' Tutor messages, by first selecting the Options menu, and then choosing Basics.

You can also set up your own custom Tutor messages through the new Prompt Creator utility. This lets you specify messages that will be spoken each time you use a control - just a quick reminder, or a short tip reminding you of what other controls might need to be used with the current one. To learn more about creating custom Tutor messages and control prompts, refer to Creating a Prompt.

Access Key Announcement

JAWS can announce access keys as you navigate through menus or dialogs or both. Use access keys to move directly to a control in a dialog box or an item in a menu. For example, with Speak All Access keys turned on, press ALT to move to the JAWS menu bar. Press DOWN ARROW to open the Options menu and select Basics. JAWS announces the name of the selected command and then says "B." B is the access key for the menu item called Basics. The next time that you go to the Options menu, you know that you can press B to quickly activate that menu item. As you navigate through the menus, make note of the access keys, so next time you use the menu, you will not have to use the arrow keys to move through each menu item. Instead, you can press the access key to automatically activate that menu item.

You can specify which access keys you want to hear in the Basics dialog, activated from the Options menu. You can turn off access key announcement, you can have JAWS Speak All access keys, Speak menu access keys only, or Speak dialog access keys only.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

JAWS Training Materials

The Basic Training for JAWS and other training materials are available in DAISY format. You can listen to and read the training modules by using the FSReader DAISY reader included with JAWS. To start FSReader, open the Help menu and choose Training. The JAWS Training Table of Contents opens so you can download and open training materials. For more information on using FSReader, select the "FSReaderGettingStarted" DAISY book and press ENTER.

For information on installing the Training Materials, see Installing JAWS. You can also download training materials from the Freedom Scientific Web site.

The JAWS Basic Training modules give you the best possible start on your road to mastering Windows with JAWS. The set takes you logically from starting JAWS to working in the Windows environment. The modules include actual samples of what you will hear as you perform various Windows and JAWS operations. All users are encouraged to take advantage of this training. Once JAWS is running, you should listen to all modules and perform the operations along with them.

Tip: There is even more training material that discusses and demonstrates specific features of JAWS on the Additional JAWS Training Downloads page.

Updating Your Training Materials

Periodically, Freedom Scientific will release new DAISY training materials that you can download by using FSReader. To search for new training materials, start FSReader, open the File menu, and choose JAWS Training Table of Contents. When this book opens, each training module is represented as a link. Press ENTER on the book you want to open. If there is an updated book available, FSReader will automatically download and install it.

 

  ------ --- --------------
  Back       Next Section
  ------ --- --------------

 

JAWS Utilities and Program Group

JAWS has several utilities that you can quickly access to view license information, configuration and settings files, and help topics.

From the Windows 7 Start menu, choose All Programs, and then JAWS <version number>. The contents of the JAWS program group display in the JAWS submenu.

In Windows 8.1 and later, press ALT+U from the JAWS application window to open the Utilities menu and select "Explore Utilities Folder". The Utilities folder opens.

Below is a brief description of the JAWS utilities.

 

+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Windows 7 Utility               | Windows 8.1 and Later Utility   | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Braille Viewer                  | Braille Viewer                  | Provides textual representation on the computer screen of the output received on a refreshable Braille device. Braille Viewer can assist sighted instructors or testers that do not read Braille or may not have access to a Braille display.                 |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Help                            | Help                            | Opens the JAWS help file.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| JAWS                            | Not available                   | Launches the JAWS program.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Run HJPad                       | Run HJPad                       | Launches the HJPad program. HJPad is a word processing program intended for use as a training tool for JAWS users.                                                                                                                                            |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Explore JAWS folder             | Not Available                   | Windows 7 only. Contains the Explore Error Reports, Explore My Settings, Explore Program Files, Explore Scripts, Explore Shared Settings, and Explore the Manuals folders. These provide shortcuts to your user settings, shared settings, and program files. |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Explore Error Reports           | Explore Error Reports           | Opens the folder containing the dump files that are generated by the JAWS Error Reporting feature.                                                                                                                                                            |
|  (Explore JAWS folder)          |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Explore My Settings             | Explore My Settings             | Opens the folder containing your user-specific JAWS settings. When you create or modify Voice Profiles, Speech and Sounds schemes, or customize any global or application-specific settings, JAWS saves them in this folder.                                  |
|  (Explore JAWS folder)          |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Explore Program Files           | Not available                   | Opens the folder where you installed JAWS, allowing you to access the program files.                                                                                                                                                                          |
|  (Explore JAWS folder)          |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Explore Scripts                 | Explore Scripts                 | Opens the folder where the shared script files are stored.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
|  (Explore JAWS folder)          |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Explore Shared Settings         | Explore Shared Settings         | Opens the folder containing your shared JAWS settings. Default factory settings are saved in this folder.                                                                                                                                                     |
|  (Explore JAWS folder)          |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Explore the Manuals             | Explore the Manuals             | Opens the folder containing electronic copies of printed JAWS documentation and other useful materials, including the JAWS Quick Start Guide.                                                                                                                 |
|  (Explore JAWS folder)          |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Tools folder                    | Not available                   | Windows 7 only. Contains the Dongle Viewer, ILM Authorization Viewer, Remove Product Activation, Start JAWS with Eloquence, Synthesizer and Braille Manager, and Uninstall JAWS.                                                                              |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Dongle Viewer                   | Dongle Viewer                   | Allows you to view license information for the dongle currently connected to your computer.                                                                                                                                                                   |
|  (Tools folder)                 |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| ILM Authorization Viewer        | ILM Authorization Viewer        | Allows you to view details of your ILM software licenses.                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
|  (Tools folder)                 |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Remove Product Activation       | Remove Product Activation       | Allows you to delete your ILM licenses for all versions of JAWS installed on this computer. Until you acquire a new license, you will only be able to use JAWS in 40 minute mode.                                                                             |
|  (Tools folder)                 |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Start JAWS with Eloquence       | Not Available                   | Use to start JAWS with the default Eloquence speech synthesizer.                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|  (Tools folder)                 |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Synthesizer and Braille Manager | Synthesizer and Braille Manager | Allows you to change which synthesizer and braille display drivers are installed on your computer. You can also change output port options for your currently installed braille displays.                                                                     |
|  (Tools folder)                 |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Uninstall JAWS                  | Not available                   | Use to uninstall JAWS from your computer                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|  (Tools folder)                 |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Not available                   | Export Settings                 | Saves all of your JAWS user settings to a single backup file that can be stored or shared with other JAWS users.                                                                                                                                              |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Not available                   | Import Settings                 | Extracts the contents of a JAWS settings backup file to your JAWS user folder.                                                                                                                                                                                |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Not available                   | Restore Settings                | Restore the settings that were in use prior to performing a settings import.                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+---------------------------------+---------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Related Topics:

Braille Viewer.

Using JAWS Help.

HJPad.

Synthesizer and Braille Manager.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Starting JAWS for Windows

After installing JAWS, you can configure it to start manually, or to launch automatically when your computer starts. The latter is known as running JAWS as a service. Starting automatically is useful for those who require speech immediately.

Manually Starting JAWS

To manually start JAWS, do the following:

1.    Press WINDOWS Key+R to open the Run dialog box.

2.    Type "JAWSX" (where X is the version number) and press ENTER.

Tip: To override your user settings and start JAWS with only the default factory settings, type "JAWSX /default" (where X is the version number). You can also assign a shortcut hot key to the JAWS shortcut. For more information, please see Define a Hot Key.

Automatically Starting JAWS

When you first install JAWS, the JAWS Startup Wizard launches. The Run JAWS Settings page in the wizard provides several options for starting JAWS. Use the default settings on this page since these will ensure that JAWS always loads, starts, and runs before and after Windows launches. If these settings change and later you want to restore the default values, do the following so that JAWS starts automatically:

1.    Start JAWS manually as previously described, and press INSERT+J to access the JAWS application window.

2.    Press ALT+H to select the Help menu, and then Z to launch the JAWS Startup Wizard.

3.    Choose Next until the Run JAWS Settings page opens. If you have an Administrator account, several options appear in the wizard. If you have a Standard User account, only the Start JAWS after log on for this user combo box appears.

4.    For an Administrator account, do the following:

·         Select the Start JAWS at the Log On Screen check box.

·         Clear the Start JAWS after Log On for all Users check box.

·         Select Always in the Start JAWS after Log On for this User combo box.

·         Clear the Run JAWS from System Tray check box.

For a Standard User account, do the following:

·         Select Always in the Start JAWS after Log On for this User combo box.

5.    Choose Next to continue through the remaining pages of the wizard.

6.    On the last page of the JAWS Startup Wizard, choose Finish to accept the changes and close the wizard. The next time you start Windows, JAWS starts automatically, and is one of the first programs available.

Tip: If JAWS is configured to start automatically at the logon screen or after you have logged into Windows, press and hold both the LEFT SHIFT and RIGHT SHIFT keys as Windows boots, or after you have logged in, to prevent JAWS from starting. This is useful if you need to troubleshoot any startup related issues you may be experiencing.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Reading Screens and Documents

Many speech functions in JAWS are accessed by using the numeric keypad (NUM PAD) located on the far right side of your keyboard. Usually this NUM PAD is used to type numbers so you must turn off the number lock function. Do this by pressing the NUM LOCK key in the upper left corner of the NUM PAD.

JAWS uses the INSERT key at the bottom left of the NUM PAD in combination with the other keys on this keypad to control what JAWS will speak.

To start JAWS reading the screen, press the key combination INSERT+DOWN ARROW. This is the Say All command. While using the Say All command, you can press the LEFT or RIGHT ARROW keys to rewind or fast forward through the text. You can also press PAGE UP or PAGE DOWN to increase or decrease the speech rate. To halt speech, press the CTRL key. To make slight reading adjustments, see Say All Options Dialog.

Below are additional reading keystrokes that are available using the NUM PAD. For more reading features, refer to Advanced Reading of Screens and Documents.

·         NUM PAD 5 Say Character

·         INSERT+NUM PAD 5 Say Word

·         INSERT+NUM PAD 5 twice  Spell Word

·         INSERT+LEFT ARROW Say Prior Word

·         INSERT+RIGHT ARROW Say Next Word

·         INSERT+UP ARROW Say Line

·         INSERT+HOME (7) Say To Cursor

·         INSERT+PAGE UP (9) Say From Cursor

·         INSERT+PAGE DOWN (3) Say Bottom Line Of Window

·         INSERT+END (1) Say Top Line Of Window

Screen Shade for Additional Privacy

For additional privacy, use the JAWS Screen Shade to prevent others from seeing what you are typing or reading by turning the screen black. This feature is available in Windows 10 and Windows 8.

To turn on the Screen Shade, use the layered command INSERT+SPACEBAR followed by F11 or triple tap with three fingers on a touch screen. Alternatively, Screen Shade can be toggled on or off using Quick Settings (INSERT+V). Once enabled, the contents of your screen can no longer be seen. The Screen Shade remains active until toggled back off, or JAWS is restarted. Screen Shade can also be turned off by doing a right mouse click.

Note: Screen Shade is strictly a privacy feature and will not increase the battery life on a laptop or tablet.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Advanced Reading of Screens and Documents

This topic describes the following advanced reading features:

·         Virtualize Window : INSERT+ALT+W

·         Virtualize Current Control: INSERT+ALT+SHIFT+W

·         Word Index: INSERT+CTRL+W

·         Skim Reading: CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW

Virtualize Window

The Virtualize Window (INSERT+ALT+W) feature captures everything in the current application window. This includes the static text that appears in the window, so that you can avoid trying to recall something to type into a message in order to communicate it to others such as support staff. This is a great way to capture error codes and dialog messages since the text can easily be copied into an e-mail message.

Try the following example to see how this works:

1.    Press INSERT+F4. The Quit JAWS dialog box appears.

2.    Next, press INSERT+ALT+W. The dialog box title, message, and command buttons appears in the virtual viewer, for example:
 "Quit JAWS
 Are you sure you want to quit JAWS? Press Enter to quit now, or Escape to cancel.
 OK Cancel"

3.    To select and copy the contents of the virtual viewer, press CTRL+A then CTRL+C.

4.    You can now open your e-mail application and paste (CTRL+V) the contents of the virtual viewer into your e-mail message.

Virtualize Current Control

In some cases, such as lists, you might want to only virtualize the current control, such as a specific list, combo box, or screen area, instead of the entire window. Pressing INSERT+ALT+SHIFT+W results in getting only the text located within the current control.

Try the following example to see how this works:

1.    Open Windows Explorer (WINDOWS Key+E).

2.    Press TAB to navigate to the list of files.

3.    Press INSERT+ALT+SHIFT+W. Only the file list appears in the virtual viewer.

4.    To select and copy the contents of the virtual viewer, press CTRL+A then CTRL+C.

5.    You can now open your e-mail application and paste (CTRL+V) the contents of the virtual viewer into your e-mail message. 

Word Index

Word Index (INSERT+CTRL+W) is the ideal tool for those who do a lot of reading for study and research purposes. Word Index generates a list of words that appear in a document or on a Web page. The words are sorted so that the highest occurrence appears first, followed by an alphabetized list of words that only appear once. You can scan the list for a specific word or concept, and then jump to that occurrence of the word. If the word appears multiple times, use the Navigational Quick Key W or the Word Index Summary button to select and skip to the next occurrence of the word. The Summary button opens the virtual viewer with a list of links. Each link is a sentence that contains the selected word. Press ENTER to activate the link. This is a useful timesaver since you can get a feel for the context of the word, and then move to the appropriate section of the document and continue reading.

Use Word Index when reading Web pages or Microsoft Word, Outlook, Notepad, WordPad, or Adobe Acrobat files.

Skim Reading

The Skim Reading feature lets you quickly browse through long documents by reading the first part of each paragraph. To begin skim reading in a document, press CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW. By default, JAWS reads the first line of each paragraph, but you can choose to read the first sentence of each paragraph instead or set up your own skim reading rules. To change your skim reading preferences, press CTRL+SHIFT+INSERT+DOWN ARROW. For more information on these options, see Skim Reading Dialog.

Tip: While skim reading, you can begin reading the entire document by pressing INSERT+DOWN ARROW to carry out the Say All command. To begin skim reading again, press CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Adjusting JAWS Options

JAWS options can be configured using either Settings Center or Quick Settings. Both features contain various options that you can apply to the program you are currently using. With Settings Center, you can apply changes globally to all applications, while with Quick Settings, you can make changes to specific applications and determine whether changes will still be in effect after your JAWS session has ended, when the computer is rebooted, or when a new window gains focus.

To open Settings Center, press INSERT+F2 and select Settings Center. For more information, see Settings Center Overview.

To open Quick Settings, press INSERT+V. For more information, see Quick Settings Overview. Note that some options are specific to certain programs. For example, if you press INSERT+V in Microsoft Word, you will see special settings that only apply to Word. Below are some of the options available for all Windows programs. For more information on specific options for Windows programs, refer to the appropriate help topic in the Popular Applications section.

Touch Cursor Options Group

The following describes the items in the Touch Cursor Options group.

Automatic Activation

This option is used to automatically turn on the Touch Cursor for the current application. The default setting is Off. However, it is on by default in several Windows 8 applications including News, Weather, and Store.

Touch Quick Keys

Use this option to enable or disable quick key navigation for the touch cursor. Touch Navigation Quick Keys are disabled by default.

Use Sounds

This option specifies whether sounds or spoken messages are used to notify you when entering or exiting the text review mode of touch navigation. The default setting is to play a sound.

Configure Types

Use this option to configure the types of controls available when navigating with the Touch Cursor. In the list of types, use the SPACEBAR to select or clear an item. When a type is selected, it is announced as you navigate with the Touch Cursor, otherwise, it is ignored.

General Options Group

The following describes the items in the General Options group.

User Verbosity

There are three levels of verbosity: Beginner, Intermediate, and Advanced. The beginner level provides the maximum amount of information spoken, while intermediate and advanced levels provide fewer details. To customize your own settings for any one of these levels, open Settings Center and select the Speech Verbosity group.

Virtual Ribbon Menu

Select this check box to turn on the Virtual Ribbon Menu. This is applicable for applications where Ribbons are present instead of the classic menu bar and menus. When it is on, an application's Ribbon is organized and navigated using the traditional menu and submenu format that is familiar to most users. By using the ARROW and TAB keys, it is easier to move focus between Upper Ribbon tabs and Lower Ribbon groups. These same keys are also used to select items within a group. In addition, SPACEBAR, ENTER, and ESC are used to expand or collapse submenus. This check box is cleared by default.

Progress Bars

Programs often use progress bars to show the status of a process, such as an installation. This option controls whether or not JAWS announces progress bar updates. When set to Spoken, JAWS will periodically read the percentages in installations, or when performing other tasks like copying large files or burning CDs. To control how often JAWS announces progress bar changes, see Progress Bar Updates Announcement in Settings Center. The default setting is Spoken.

Top and Bottom Edge

This option controls whether or not JAWS beeps when it encounters a top or bottom boundary while you navigate.

·         Silent: No beep is heard when a top or bottom boundary is encountered.

·         Alert with Sound: A beep is heard when a top or bottom boundary is encountered. Note that for Word and Outlook 2007 or later, JAWS beeps and rereads the first or last line when it comes across a top or bottom boundary when navigating using the UP ARROW or DOWN ARROW keys. This causes JAWS to read the line over and over if you try to move past the boundary. The default setting is Alert with Sound.

Graphics

This option controls which graphics JAWS announces when reading with ARROW keys or with a braille display. It applies to graphics such as button icons found in an application's toolbar or menu bar. It does not apply to graphics in virtualized messages in Outlook, Web pages, or PDF documents.

·         None: JAWS does not announce graphics as they are encountered.

·         Labeled: JAWS only announces graphics that have been labeled with the graphics labeler.

·         All: JAWS announces all graphics as they are encountered. JAWS reads the labels for the graphics, if they are assigned. If no labels are assigned for a graphic, JAWS assigns a unique number. This is the default setting.

Screen Echo

This option allows you to select what information is echoed when text on the screen changes.

·         Off: Changes to displayed text are not echoed.

·         Highlighted: Changes to highlighted text are echoed. This is the default setting.

·         All: Changes to any displayed text are echoed.

Focus Loss Announcement

Use this option to toggle the Lost Focus message on or off. This option is off by default. The Lost Focus message is a JAWS alert feature that lets you know when a window loses focus, becomes invisible, or becomes inoperable. When these conditions exist for longer than three seconds, JAWS will announce, “Lost focus,” and if tutor messages are turned on, you will also hear, “Press ALT TAB,” which will let you regain focus of an open application, window, or desktop. The Focus Loss Announcement is off by default. The setting of this option is saved to the Default.JCF file and is constant across applications and JAWS sessions.

Convenient OCR

The following describes the items in the Convenient OCR group.

Primary Recognition Language

Use this item to specify the language used to read and decipher text. Select the language that corresponds to the language of the printed page you are acquiring. This allows correct recognition of characters (such as accent marks and umlauts) unique to that language.

Secondary Recognition Language

Use this item to specify a second recognition language used to recognize acquired text. It uses the languages selected for both the primary and secondary options to recognize text. This is helpful if the document contains text from more than one language.

Reading Options Group

The following describes the items in the Reading Options group.

Text Analyzer

Use this option to identify inconsistencies such as unmatched parentheses, unintentional format changes, extra whitespace, and stray or unspaced punctuation when editing or proofreading a document by line, sentence, paragraph, or during a Say All (INSERT+DOWN ARROW).

·         Off: Inconsistencies in text are not reported as the document is navigated. This is the default setting.

·         Indicate with Sound: A sound is played to identify inconsistencies.

·         Speak Count: The number of inconsistencies in the current text is announced.

·         Describe Inconsistencies: Gives a description of the error.

Smart Word Reading

This option controls how JAWS reads words with punctuation in them, such as phone numbers. When off, JAWS reads the punctuation symbol under the cursor. When on, JAWS reads the entire word. The default setting is on.

Language Detect Change

This option controls whether or not JAWS detects changes in languages within documents which support language tags. For example, if JAWS finds Spanish text on a Web page, that text is spoken in Spanish. This detection only affects those synthesizers, such as Eloquence or Vocalizer Expressive, that support multiple languages. In Microsoft Word, the default setting is On. The default setting is Off in all other applications.

Custom Labels

This option allows you to enable or temporarily disable custom labels that you have defined for Web pages or forms. This feature allows individuals, such as support staff, developers, and testers, to suppress their custom labels while working with a document or Web page, without permanently deleting them. For more information, see Custom Labels. The default setting is On.

Stopwords Exception Dictionary

This option controls whether or not a stop words dictionary is used by the Word List (INSERT+CTRL+W) feature. A stop words dictionary is a list of words that will be ignored by the search. These are common, recurring words; examples include words such as and, of, the. The default setting is on.

Say All Options Group

The following describes the items in the Say All Options group

Scheme

Use this option to control how links and headings are announced when reading using the Say All command (INSERT+DOWN ARROW). Select Say All Text with Sounds to hear a subtle WAV file sound, such as a Ding, when JAWS reads a link or heading. Select Say All Text Only to ignore an indication of elements like links and headings. Select No Change to continue using the current speech and sounds scheme in use. The default setting is No Change.

Say All Reads By

This option allows you to determine how JAWS reads text when you use the Say All command (INSERT+DOWN ARROW).

·         Line with Pauses: JAWS reads by line, pausing slightly at the end of each line.

·         Line without Pauses: This option allows for smoother reading and is the default setting.

·         Sentence: Select this option for programs where Say All sounds choppy. This moves the pauses between elements to the ends of sentences, making the reading sound smoother.

·         Paragraph: This option is very useful in large documents, since you can press the right SHIFT key to quickly move through the paragraphs without needing to interrupt Say All.

Capitalization

Use this option to specify if JAWS should announce capitalization when reading with Say All (INSERT+DOWN ARROW). If you choose Indicate, JAWS says, "Cap" for single capital letters, and, "All cap," for capitalized words. The default setting is Ignore.

You can also use the Indicate Caps During Say All option in Settings Center to toggle this option on or off. It is located in the Say All group.

Editing Options Group

The following describes the items in the Editing Options group.

Typing Echo

This option controls how JAWS speaks as you type.

·         None: Select this option if you do not want JAWS to echo what you are typing.

·         Characters: Each character you type is echoed. This is the default setting.

·         Words: Each word you type is echoed after you press SPACEBAR or ENTER.

·         Both Characters and Words: Characters are echoed as you type them and words are echoed after you press SPACEBAR or ENTER.

Caps Indicate

This option controls when JAWS indicates capitalization while reading with reading keys or typing text. Available settings are On Character; On Character and Word; On Character, Word, and Line; and Never. The default setting is On Character.

Punctuation

This option controls the amount of punctuation JAWS will speak. Available settings are None, Some, Most, and All. To control which punctuation is spoken at a given level, see Customize Punctuation in Settings Center. The default setting is Most.

Indentation

This option controls whether or not JAWS will indicate indentation as you navigate using reading commands. By default, when using the Classic Speech and Sounds scheme, JAWS indicates indentation by announcing the number of spaces. To control what indentation to indicate, and how it should be indicated, See the Speech and Sounds Manager Indentation page. The default setting is Ignore.

Spelling Options Group

The following describes the items in the Spelling Options group.

Text Spell

This option controls how JAWS spells text when you issue one of the Spell commands, such as Spell Word, which is the Say Word command twice quickly, or Spell Line, which is the Say Line command twice quickly. The available options are phonetically or alphabetically.

For example, when set to spell alphabetically, JAWS spells the letters one by one, such as "J A W S." When set to spell phonetically, JAWS uses words to represent the letters, such as: "Juliet Alpha Whiskey Sierra." The default setting is Alphabetically.

Alphanumeric Text

This option controls how JAWS speaks letter and number combinations, such as license plate numbers. Available settings are Read as Word, which is the default, Spell, and Spell Phonetically.

Numbers Options Group

The following describes the items in the Numbers Options group.

Speak Single Digits Threshold:

When JAWS encounters a number string, it can read the string as a single number or as individual digits. Use this option to set the minimum threshold at which JAWS will read individual digits. For example, if JAWS is configured to read 5 or more digits, then the number string 54321 is read as 5 4 3 2 1.

This is useful when reading long number strings such as telephone numbers, serial numbers, and part numbers. Note that this rule will apply under the following conditions: the number string is not preceded by or followed by an alpha character, and it does not contain a dash, colon, decimal, or slash to separate the digits similar to what is used for telephone, time, or date formatting. If you want to override the dash exception of this rule, toggle on the Speak Single Digits if Number Contains Dashes option located in the Numbers Options group.

Other values for this option are Six or More Digits, Seven or More Digits, Eight or More Digits, and Controlled by Synthesizer. When the latter is selected, the current synthesizer determines how numbers are read. The default setting is 5 or more digits.

Speak Single Digits if Number Contains Dashes

Select this option so that number strings containing dashes are read by JAWS as individual digits. This will apply when the dash is preceded by and followed by a digit similar to telephone number formatting. The default setting is On.

Braille Options Group

The Braille Options group is only available if JAWS is being used with a refreshable braille display. For more information about the options in this group, see the Adjust Braille Options topic.

Last Changed Settings

This group contains the last 25 options that were recently changed for an application or document. When you select an item in the tree view, its corresponding settings appear in the configuration display pane on the right side of the Quick Settings window. Note that once this group has 25 items, the last setting in the list is deleted when another item is added. To remove an item from the list, select it, press SHIFT+F10, and then select Remove. To remove all items from the list, select the Last Changed Settings group in the tree view, press SHIFT+F10, and then select Remove All.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

The JAWS Application Window

The JAWS application can be configured to run in a normal window, or to run from the system tray. This topic provides a detailed description of the options available in the JAWS application window. If you run JAWS from the system tray, these same options are still available through a shortcut menu.

When open, the JAWS application window displays the following menus:

Options

Utilities

Language

Help

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Options Menu Overview

This topic describes the menu items found in the Options menu of the JAWS application window.

Basics

Select this menu item to open a dialog containing basic JAWS settings. for more information, please refer to JAWS Basic Settings.

Voices

Open this submenu to access voice profile dialog boxes to adjust speech settings or select a voice profile for an application. You can also add or remove Vocalizer Expressive voices.

Voice Adjustment

Select this item to create a new voice profile based on a synthesizer's factory default settings, or to edit the settings of an existing voice profile. For more information, please refer to Voice Adjustment.

Select a Voice Profile

Select this item to open the Select a Voice Profile dialog box, which lets you select an existing profile that JAWS can use globally with all applications, or an existing profile that JAWS can use with the currently open application, or both. A voice profile consists of a synthesizer, language, voice, and various settings that control speech. For more information, refer to Voice Profiles.

Add/Remove Voices

Select this item to open a dialog box where you can sample and install or remove Vocalizer Expressive 2 voices. For more information, refer to the Add/Remove Voices topic.

Braille

Select this item to open a dialog to adjust Basic Braille settings. For more information, please refer to Braille Basic Settings.

Manage Application Settings

Select this item to enable or disable applications in which the settings have been modified. Changes may have been made through Settings Center or with custom scripts. This dialog allows you to temporarily disable those application-specific settings quickly, so that you can troubleshoot by ruling out any changes made in JAWS. This dialog is ideal for technical support personnel who are assisting users with their installed version of JAWS. For more information, please refer to Manage Application Settings.

Exit

If you select this item, a dialog is brought up to confirm whether or not you wish to exit the JAWS application. Press ENTER to exit JAWS, or press ESC to return to the JAWS application window.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Utilities Menu Overview

This topic describes the Utilities menu items found in the JAWS application window. For more information on the options accessible from this menu, please see Overview of the JAWS Utilities.

JAWS Tandem

Use this menu item to start a JAWS Tandem session.

Synthesizer and Braille Manager

This menu item provides access to the Synthesizer and Braille Manager.

Sound Cards

Use this menu item to select a sound card for JAWS speech output when multiple sound cards are installed in your computer. See Sound Cards for more information.

Settings Center

Use this menu item to open the default configuration (JCF) file in Settings Center.

Keyboard Manager

This menu item provides access to the Keyboard Manager.

Dictionary Manager

This menu item provides access to the Dictionary Manager.

Frame Viewer

This menu item provides access to the Frame Viewer.

Script Manager

This menu item provides access to the Script Manager.

Navigation Quick Key Manager

Use this menu item to open the Navigation Quick Key Manager.

Re-Initialize Authorization

This menu item allows you to force JAWS to search for valid ILM authorization. If the search is successful, JAWS displays your serial number.

Import/Export

Use this menu item to Import or Export JAWS user settings as well as Migrate settings from an earlier version.

Explore Utilities Folder

Available in Windows 8.1 and later, this menu item opens a folder containing various JAWS shortcuts and utilities including exploring various JAWS settings folders, launching the Synthesizer and Braille Manager to add or remove speech synthesizers or braille displays, removing product activation, and more.

OCR Options

Use this menu item to acquire and OCR images from a connected Freedom Scientific camera or flatbed scanner, or view the Convenient OCR help topic.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Language Menu Overview

This topic describes the Language menu items found in the JAWS application window.

JAWS Language

Choose this item to open a submenu where you can select the user interface and operating system language setting for JAWS. Changing the user interface language of JAWS to something other than the Operating System language will create problems when trying to navigate and work with applications. The default setting is OS Language. This menu is only available if you chose to install additional languages during installation.

Voice Profiles

A voice profile consists of a synthesizer such as Eloquence, SAPI 5, or Vocalizer Expressive, and a collection of voice settings such as the synthesizer voice, speech rate, amount of punctuation spoken, and volume. Use this submenu item to quickly select and set a default voice profile for JAWS, select a voice profile for the current application, or turn off speech by selecting the No Speech option. (Note that speech will remain off until you select a voice profile or restart JAWS.)

If you want to create a new voice profile, or edit an existing voice profile, use the Create New option from the Voice Profiles submenu to open the Voice Adjustment dialog box.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Help Menu Overview

This topic describes the Help menu items found in the JAWS application window.

Commands Search

Use this menu item to locate specific JAWS or Fusion keystrokes. For more information, refer to the Commands Search topic.

Training

Choose this menu item to start FSReader and open the JAWS Training Materials Table of Contents book. From here you can choose from various links to open the JAWS Basic Training or What's New. These DAISY books guide you through the new features of your JAWS version and help you learn the basics of using JAWS.

JAWS Help Topics

This menu item provides access to the JAWS help system.

Keyboard Commands

This menu item opens the JAWS help system, and moves you to topics providing information on available commands in JAWS.

What's New

This menu item allows you to view descriptions of the new features added in this version of JAWS.

End User License Agreement

This menu item opens the help system to the JAWS License Agreement.

Technical Support

This menu item provides access to information on how to contact Freedom Scientific Technical Support.

Web Resources

Web Resources provides the following helpful links to Freedom Scientific products and resources:

·         JAWS Headquarters – a one-stop resource for JAWS. Use these pages to download software updates, locate resources, and learn new ways to use JAWS.

·         Technical Support – Use this link to access support bulletins and FAQs.

·         FS Activate – Use this link to verify the number of available JAWS activation keys, request a reset of the number of activations allowed for a registered user, or retrieve an activation license code based on your Authorization number and Locking code.

·         Surfing the Internet – Use this link to access Surf's Up! A useful tool that teaches you how to work with and read HTML pages with JAWS.

·         Fusion Magnification – Learn more about Fusion, a product combining ZoomText and JAWS for a complete screen magnification and screen reading solution.

·         Training Headquarters – Learn more about training options and tutorials available from Freedom Scientific.

·         Free Training Webinars – Access archives of free online training. You will find a wealth of information on topics ranging from how to use JAWS reading commands, to using JAWS with various applications such as Microsoft Office, and much more.

·         www.FreedomScientific.com – Use this link to open the Freedom Scientific home page.

·         FSCast Homepage – Access episodes of FSCast, Freedom Scientific's podcast featuring news, interviews, and product demonstrations relating to Freedom Scientific products.

About JAWS for Windows

This menu item provides access to the version number, serial number, copyright notices, your computer's unique locking code, and other important information about JAWS. It also contains information about your SMA, or software maintenance agreement. Purchasing an SMA for JAWS provides you with automatic upgrades at a reduced price for a specific amount of time. Note that although the About box gives SMA information, if the information in the Freedom Scientific database differs, the database information is assumed to be accurate and up to date.

Startup Wizard

The JAWS Startup Wizard is a helpful tool that allows you to configure specific JAWS parameters, such as automatically starting JAWS when you turn on your computer, speech and braille preferences, or various other JAWS settings. During a new JAWS installation, the Startup Wizard appears after you complete product activation. However, it can always be accessed later from the JAWS Help menu by pressing ALT+H and choosing Startup Wizard.

License

This submenu contains options for managing your JAWS license.

Check for Updates

Choose Check for Updates from the JAWS Help menu to search for new versions of the software on the web. JAWS then checks to see if any updates are available and displays a list for you to choose from. You can then choose to download and install any of the new software versions in order to keep JAWS up-to-date. This service helps Freedom Scientific make minor changes and improvements to JAWS much more frequently.

Internet access and administrative rights are required to check for updates.

Tip: By default, JAWS will automatically notify you when an update is available when it first starts. If you want to disable automatic notification of updates for any reason, open the Options menu, choose Basics, and clear the Automatic Notification of Updates check box.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Manage Application Settings

This dialog allows you to enable or disable customized settings created for an application using either Settings Center or a script.

Application Settings

This list box is a directory of applications in which the default configuration values were changed using either Settings Center or a script. A check box appears before each modified application. If the check box is checked, JAWS uses the customized settings. If the check box is unchecked, JAWS will not use the customized settings.

Enable All

Select this button to check the check boxes for all applications in the list box. The modified settings will be used for each application.

Disable All 

Select this button to uncheck the check boxes for all applications in the list box. The modified settings will not be used for each application.

Remove Selected

Select this button to remove any checked application from the list box.

OK

When you select this button, any changes you have made are saved, and you are returned to the JAWS application window.

Cancel

When you select this button, any changes you have made are discarded, and you are returned to the JAWS application window.

 

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

 

 

JAWS Basic Settings

To change your JAWS basic settings, open the Options menu and choose Basics. This topic documents the settings available in the Basic Settings Dialog.

Tutor Messages

Use this series of radio buttons to determine which Tutor messages are spoken. Tutor messages provide navigation tips in applications and Windows.

·         Turn Off Menu and Control Help: No Tutor messages are spoken.

·         Announce Menu and Control Help: All Tutor messages are spoken.

·         Announce Custom Messages Only: Only custom Tutor messages added through Prompt Manager are spoken.

Access Keys

Access keys are the keys you press to move directly to a control or an item in a menu. Use this group of radio buttons to specify which access keys are announced: all access keys, only access keys for menu items, only access keys for controls in dialogs, or no access keys.

Automatically Start JAWS

Having JAWS start automatically, which is also known as running JAWS as a service, is a great help to those who require speech immediately. This option appears as a button that opens the Start JAWS Options dialog box. Use it to determine if JAWS starts before or after you log on and start Windows.

Note: The default values of the Start JAWS Option dialog box assure that JAWS is always loaded and running before and after you start Windows. If you have an Administrator account, three options appear. If you have a Standard User account, only the Start JAWS after log on for this user combo box appears. There is no need to change the default values.

·         Automatically start JAWS at the Log On screen: When this check box is selected, JAWS will load and start when the Windows log on screen appears. The check box is selected by default.
 
 Administrator rights are required to change this setting. If you have Standard user rights, you cannot change the value of this check box, and you will not hear it using JAWS. Clear this check box if you want JAWS to be off when the log on screen appears. The check box value applies to all users who log on to this version of JAWS on this computer.

·         Automatically start JAWS after log on for all users: When this check box is selected, JAWS will load and start after you log on to Windows. It is cleared by default.

Note: The only time that it is necessary to change the value of this check box is if you have an Administrator account on this computer, and you want to control how JAWS starts for all subsequent users who log on to Windows using this computer. If you do not have Administrator rights, you cannot change the value of this check box, and you will not hear it using JAWS.
 
 If you have Standard user rights on this computer, refer to the combo box labeled Start JAWS after log on for this user for information that describes how to start JAWS after logging on to Windows.

·         Start JAWS after log on for this user: This combo box allows an individual user to control if JAWS starts after he or she logs on to Windows. This combo box has three values: Always, Never, and Using the All Users Setting. The default value is Always.

Note: This combo box is available to users with Administrator and Standard user rights. The value selected for the combo box overrides the value of the Automatically start JAWS after log on for all users check box.
 
 If Always is selected, JAWS will start every time the current user logs on to Windows.
 
 If Never is selected, JAWS will never start after the current user logs-on to Windows.
 
 If the current user selects the value labeled Using the All Users Setting, then one of the following can happen:
 
 JAWS will start after the current user logs on if the Administrator selected the Automatically start JAWS after log on for all users check box, or JAWS will not start after the current user logs on if the Administrator cleared the Automatically start JAWS after log on for all users check box.

Prompt to Confirm When Exiting JAWS

Select this check box to have JAWS prompt you on exit giving you an opportunity to cancel that action. When cleared, JAWS immediately closes when you use any of the commands to exit the program including INSERT+F4. This option is selected by default.

Automatic Notification of Updates

Select this check box to have JAWS indicate when a software update is available. You then have the option to install it now or later. When this check box is cleared, you will not be alerted when software updates are available. In this case, you must manually check for updates using the update feature in the JAWS Help menu. This check box is selected by default.

Run JAWS from System Tray

This option removes JAWS from the TAB order and places it in the system tray. This change takes effect the next time you start JAWS. To access JAWS from the system tray, press INSERT+J. This brings up a shortcut menu with the Options, Utilities, Languages, and Help items listed. Press RIGHT ARROW to access sub-menus for each of these items. Press ALT to close this shortcut menu.

Show Virtual Viewer on Screen

Use this check box to specify whether the Virtual Viewer is visually displayed on the screen when you access context-sensitive (INSERT+F1) help and other helpful messages. It may be useful in training environments to show the Virtual Viewer. However, in a presentation application like PowerPoint, it might disrupt your presentation to display the Virtual Viewer. JAWS functions the same in these messages regardless of whether the Virtual Viewer is visible. For more information on using the Virtual Viewer, see Virtual Viewer.

Note: You must quit and restart JAWS for changes to this option to take effect.

Use Keyboard Layout

Use this combo box to select the desired keyboard layout. Select from desktop, laptop, or kinesis. JAWS keystrokes frequently use keys located on the numeric keypad, which usually is on the right side of the keyboard. Most laptop computers do not have the numeric keypad, so JAWS provides alternate keystrokes, called laptop keystrokes. If your keyboard has the numeric keypad, choose the desktop keyboard option. For those of you who are using any of the Kinesis keyboards, select kinesis as this implements the features of these keyboards. If your keyboard does not have a numeric keypad, choose the laptop keyboard option.

Windows System Parameters

Select this button to open the Windows System Parameters dialog. The Windows features selected in the Windows System Parameters dialog are disabled when JAWS starts, and are enabled again when JAWS closes. Features that were disabled before JAWS started are not enabled when JAWS is closed. Disabling these items improves JAWS functionality, so we recommend you leave all items checked. For more information on these features, refer to Windows Help.

Advanced

Choose the Advanced button to open a dialog box containing the following additional JAWS options:

·         Try Remote Access Speech on Startup - If you clear this check box, JAWS uses the host's speech synthesizer and sound card to provide speech feedback during remote JAWS sessions.

·         Try Remote Access Braille on Startup - If you clear this check box, JAWS uses the host's default braille display during remote JAWS sessions.

·         Enable Remote Access Client - Select this check box if you want to use JAWS during terminal sessions. You can clear this check box if you will not be using JAWS when you connect remotely to another computer. You must purchase the remote access option for your software license to use JAWS during terminal sessions.

·         Enable Remote Access Server - Select this check box if users that connect remotely to your computer will be using JAWS during their terminal sessions. If you clear this check box, remote JAWS users will not have speech and braille access to terminal sessions.

·         Run JAWS Without Speech - Select this check box if you want JAWS to run without speech. Note that you will still have braille support while speech is off. The setting takes effect immediately and does not require a JAWS restart. If you want to temporarily run JAWS without speech, but you want speech available the next time you start JAWS, choose No Speech from the Voice Profiles submenu, which is located in the JAWS Language menu.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Braille Basic Settings

To change your braille basic settings, open the Options menu and choose braille. This topic documents the settings available in the Braille Basic Settings Dialog.

Default Braille Display

Use this combo box to select the default braille display. The default braille display is active each time you start JAWS.

Modify Settings

Select this button to open a dialog to modify connection settings for the default braille display.

Add Braille Display

Select this button to add a braille display for use with JAWS.

Advanced

Selecting this button opens the Settings Center and places you in the Braille group so you can configure additional braille options.

Show Braille Load Error

If this check box is checked, when JAWS starts, a message is displayed when the default braille display driver cannot be loaded.

OK

When you select this button, any changes you have made are saved, and you are returned to the JAWS application window.

Cancel

When you select this button, any changes you have made are discarded, and you are returned to the JAWS application window.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Selecting a Voice Profile

A voice profile consists of settings for the synthesizer, language, voice, and other speech items that define how JAWS speaks. Traditionally in JAWS, users have created specific language voice profiles, along with task specific profiles such as profiles for proof reading, pleasure reading, and speed reading. Beginning with JAWS 16, single profiles can now contain the settings for multiple languages, allowing users to have a single task specific profile that works regardless of the language they switch to.

For example, if a person spoke English, Spanish, and French, they can create a single "proofreading" profile. With speech set to English, they would turn on the announcement of all punctuation and set the speaking rate to be a little slower than their normal reading rate. Next, they would switch the language to Spanish, choose their preferred voice, and make the punctuation and reading rate changes. After that, they would do the same for French and save their profile with “proofreading” as the name. This proofreading profile can now be used regardless of whether the voice is set to English, French, or Spanish.

As with previous versions of JAWS, you can set profiles to automatically be used when you enter specific applications. For example, you may want a profile that simply sets punctuation to “All” when your focus is in a coding application.

The sections below describe how to create and manage voice profiles.

Creating a New Voice Profile

Starting with an existing voice profile is an easy and quick way to create a new profile. You begin with basic voice settings, customize the settings to match the activity to be performed or the application to be used, and then save the new profile using a name that easily identifies it.

Before creating the profile, give some thought to how you want to use it and if you want to use it in situations where you will encounter multiple languages. For example, you can create a single voice profile that contains multiple languages with unique settings for each language. With each language, you can choose among the available voices you have installed for that language. For your native language, you may be very comfortable with a very fast speech rate, but with other languages, you may want to have the speech rate slowed down for better understanding.

If JAWS detects language tags in a document or web page, it will automatically switch to the appropriate language. If these tags are missing, you can always press WINDOWS Key+CTRL+L to manually change languages. This hot key opens the Select a Language dialog box. It shows all languages currently installed on your computer.

Note: To create multi-language profiles, you must have different synthesizer voices installed on your computer. These can be downloaded for free from the Freedom Scientific web site. To access the latest Vocalizer Expressive voices, choose the More Voices item from the JAWS Help menu.

You can also create a voice profile oriented toward a specific task or activity. For example, you can have a voice profile dedicated to proofreading Word documents, or a profile dedicated for leisurely reading of emails or web pages, or a profile for software applications you use when creating your web page.

To create a new voice profile, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to make the JAWS window active.

2.    Press ALT+O to open the Options menu, Press V to choose the Voices submenu, and then press ENTER to open the Voice Adjustment dialog box.

3.    Select a factory voice profile in the Profile Name combo box. For example, Vocalizer Expressive – (factory).

4.    Select a language in the Synthesizer Language combo box. For example, English – United States or English – United Kingdom.

5.    Select a voice in the Person combo box. For example, Allison Premium – United States or Daniel Premium – United Kingdom.

6.    Make any necessary changes to the speech rate, punctuation, or other voice settings.

7.    Choose Apply, and then No when asked if you want to apply these changes as the default voice profile.

8.    If you want to add another language to this profile, repeat steps 4 through 7, but select a different language and voice, for example, Spanish – Spain and Monica Premium – Spain. You can add as many languages as you have installed on your computer.

Note: You can select a primary language for the profile. To do this, see "Selecting a Primary Language" in the section below.

9.    When finished, choose Save As and type a name for the new voice profile. Choose Yes or No to make this the new default profile, and then choose OK to close the dialog box.

Note: If you do not rename the new profile, it will use the same name as the selected factory voice profile. However, its name will no longer be identified as “factory” in the Profile Name combo box.

Selecting a Primary Language

While setting up your profile, you have the option of selecting a primary synthesizer language. This is the language that is heard when you activate the profile. By default, this is set to "Match JAWS UI Language," which means that it always matches the language of the JAWS interface. For example, an English version of JAWS will use English as its primary synthesizer language. A Spanish version will use Spanish as its primary synthesizer language. For more information, see Set Language as Primary in the Voice Adjustment dialog box.

To use a different primary language in the profile, do the following:

1.    Select a language in the Synthesizer Language combo box.

2.    Choose the "Set Language as Primary" button.

3.    Choose Yes if asked to change the primary language.

4.    Save the profile. JAWS now uses this selection as its primary language. It is also identified as "primary" in the Synthesizer Language combo box.

Restoring a Factory Voice Profile

To restore a default voice profile:

1.    Select the modified default voice profile in the Profile Name combo box, for example, Vocalizer Expressive.

2.    Choose the Delete Profile button and then Yes to delete the profile. JAWS switches to the first voice profile in the Profile Name combo box.

3.    Select the Profile Name combo box again, and the profile appears and is identified as “factory” in the list, for example, Vocalizer Expressive – (factory).

Deleting a Voice Profile

To delete a voice profile, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to make the JAWS window active.

2.    Press ALT+O to open the Options menu, Press V to choose the Voices submenu, and then press ENTER to open the Voice Adjustment dialog box.

3.    In the Profile Name combo box, select the voice profile that you want to delete.

4.    Choose Delete Profile and then Yes to delete the profile. JAWS switches to the first voice profile in the Profile Name combo box.

Note: You cannot delete a default voice profile that is labeled as “factory,” for example, Eloquence - (factory) or Vocalizer Expressive - (factory).

5.    Select another voice profile in the Profile Name combo box, or choose OK to close the dialog box.

Selecting a Voice Profile for an Application

To select a voice profile for an application, do the following:

1.    Make sure that JAWS focus is in the application and then press INSERT+CTRL+S to open the Select a Voice Profile dialog box. It contains a combo box labeled Default, which assigns a voice profile that is used globally by JAWS, and the For <application name> combo box, which assigns a voice profile for a specific application.

2.    If JAWS focus is in the Default combo box, press TAB to move to the For combo box.

3.    Press UP ARROW or DOWN ARROW to scroll through the list of voice profiles, and then press ENTER to select a voice profile. The dialog box closes and JAWS now uses the selected profile for the open application.

Note: If you select Use Default, which is the first item in the combo box list, JAWS will use the same voice profile currently selected in the Default combo box for the current application.

Related Topics:

Voice Profile Adjustment Settings

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Voice Profile Adjustment Settings

Use the Voice Adjustment dialog box to create a new or edit an existing voice profile. A voice profile consists of a synthesizer, voice, and other speech parameters. You can customize these settings to create a unique voice profile for any application on your computer, and then give the profile an easily identifiable name for quick selection in the future.

The Voice Adjustment dialog box lets you start with a synthesizer's factory default settings to use as a template, so that in addition to application specific profiles, you can change and save speech settings so that they apply globally for all JAWS speech in any application. After configuring a JAWS default profile, you can quickly switch between it and others by pressing INSERT+CTRL+S.

The following sections describe the Voice Adjustment settings.

Profile Name

Use this combo box to select the voice profile that you want to use. This provides a starting point for you to modify various options in this dialog box. After customizing your voice settings, you can name it and save it as a new profile using the Save As button.

JAWS ships with several factory voice profiles based on the synthesizers installed on your computer. (At a minimum, the Eloquence, Microsoft Mobile, and SAPI 5 speech synthesizers will always be available.) This makes it easy for you to use these settings as a template for future voice profiles that you create and save for JAWS and other applications.

Note: The Vocalizer Expressive Profile is only available if you have downloaded and installed a Vocalizer Expressive voice. To access the latest Vocalizer Expressive voices, use the Add/Remove Voices utility located in the Voices submenu in the JAWS Options menu.

Delete Profile

Use this button to delete a voice profile. This button is not available for the standard Eloquence - (factory), SAPI 5 - (factory), and Vocalizer Expressive - (factory) voice profiles.

Enable Additional Voice Profiles for Installed Vocalizer Expressive 2 Voices

By default, when you use the Add/Remove Voices utility to install Vocalizer Expressive voices, a profile is created for each individual voice. These profiles are displayed in the list following the normal factory and user created profiles. Clear this check box if you prefer not to have these additional profiles generated for each installed voice.

Synthesizer Language

Use this combo box to select a synthesizer language that you want the selected profile to use. The available languages are determined by the speech synthesizer you are using. This combo box also lists different dialects, or accents, for the same language if voices for those dialects are installed. For instance, English (United States) or English (United Kingdom).

You can configure different voice settings for each available language and save them in the same voice profile. For example, if English is the primary language in the profile, you can configure the Rate, Punctuation, Pitch, and so on. If you also have one or more Spanish voices available, you could then select Spanish from this combo box, and then configure a different rate, pitch, or punctuation level that will automatically be used when JAWS switches to that language. Note that if you have voices for different dialects in the same language, such as English (United States) and English (United Kingdom), the same voice settings will apply for all dialects in the same language.

Tip: Press CTRL+WINDOWS Key+L to switch languages in the currently active voice profile.

Set Language as Primary

This button sets the language currently selected in the Synthesizer Language combo box as the primary language, which means this will be the language that is heard when this profile is active. For instance, if you use an application that primarily displays text in Spanish, you could create a profile with Spanish configured as the primary language and specify that JAWS use this profile only in the particular application. This option is not available if the primary language is currently selected.

By default, the primary language is set to "Match JAWS UI Language", which is the first item in the Synthesizer Language combo box. This means that the primary language used by the profile will always match the language of the JAWS interface. If an English version of JAWS is installed, the profile will default to using an English voice. If a Spanish version of JAWS is installed, the profile will default to using a Spanish voice.

If you attempt to set a language as primary that does not match the current JAWS UI language, a dialog box displays asking if you are sure you want to change the profile language so that it no longer matches the JAWS UI language. For example, using a Spanish voice when navigating menus with the English version of JAWS may not speak items as expected. Choose Yes to continue, or No if you do not want to set the selected language as primary. If you set a dialect of a particular language as primary, for instance, English - Austrailia or English - United Kingdom, This dialog box will not be displayed as these are dialects of English and still match the JAWS UI language.

Speak Sample

This button speaks a sample of the currently selected voice using the current voice settings.

Voice Group Box

Use the Voice controls to change various characteristics of synthesized speech in JAWS.

Adjust

You can configure JAWS so that slight variations to JAWS speech are heard when using different cursors, for example, the PC Cursor versus the JAWS Cursor, or when listening to helpful information such as tutor messages. The Adjust combo box lets you select specific voice context and then set various voice parameters, such as speech rate and pitch, so that you can easily distinguish where and what JAWS is reading on your computer screen. The following describes the items in the Adjust combo box.

·         All Context - When selected, you can make one set of changes to the Voice controls that can then be applied at once to the PC Cursor Voice, JAWS Cursor Voice, Keyboard Voice, and Tutor and Message Voice items listed in this combo box.

·         PC Cursor Voice - The PC Cursor is the primary cursor used in JAWS. It corresponds to the system focus. To use a specific voice to distinguish when JAWS is reading a document, moving through or selecting options or icons, and performing most standard Windows functions, select PC Cursor and then change voice parameters such as speech rate, pitch, person, and so on.

·         JAWS Cursor Voice - The JAWS Cursor is linked to mouse pointer functions in Windows and other applications. Select JAWS Cursor and then change other voice settings in the Voice group to differentiate when the JAWS Cursor is active.

·         Keyboard Voice - Use the Keyboard voice when you want JAWS to announce characters and words in a different voice when typing echo is on. To customize the Keyboard voice, select this item and then change voice settings such as rate, pitch, and so on.

·         Tutor and Message Voice - Use this item when you want tutor messages announced in a specific voice. A tutor message can provide navigation tips in Windows and other applications. For example, if you press ALT to access an application's menu bar, JAWS announces the message, "To navigate, press LEFT or RIGHT ARROW." To customize the Tutor and Message voice, select this item and then change voice settings such as rate, pitch, and so on.

Person

Use the Person list to select which synthesizer voice you want to use with a specific language from the Synthesizer Language combo box or voice context from the Adjust combo box. The voices that are available are determined by which speech synthesizer is currently in use.

Note: If you have several voices in several dialects of a language installed, all voices will be listed regardless of what language dialect is selected in the Synthesizer Language combo box. For example, if English - United Kingdom is selected, this combo box will still list English - United States voices as well as the English - United Kingdom voices.

Rate

Use this scroll bar to adjust the rate of speech for the currently selected synthesizer. Press RIGHT ARROW, UP ARROW, or PAGE UP to increase the speech rate. Press LEFT ARROW, DOWN ARROW, or PAGE DOWN to decrease the speech rate.

Punctuation

This combo box allows you to specify how much punctuation JAWS speaks. Available options are None, Some, Most, and All. Most is selected by default.

Pitch

The Pitch slider allows you to adjust the pitch for the currently selected voice. Note that some SAPI5 synthesizers do not support pitch change like Eloquence, Vocalizer Expressive, and some other hardware and software synthesizers.

Volume

Use this scroll bar to adjust the volume of Vocalizer Expressive, SAPI 5, and some hardware speech synthesizers. Press LEFT ARROW, DOWN ARROW, or PAGE DOWN to decrease the synthesizer volume. Press RIGHT ARROW, UP ARROW, or PAGE UP to increase the synthesizer volume. If you are using Eloquence as the speech synthesizer, use the system volume to adjust volume control.

Spell Rate Change Percent

Enter a value that will decrease the speech rate when JAWS spells words or lines. This item is only available for some synthesizers and when the Adjust combo box is set to All Context.

Upper Case Pitch Case Percent

Enter a value to vary the pitch when you type or navigate across capital letters. This item is only available for some synthesizers including Eloquence and Vocalizer Expressive, and when the Adjust combo box is set to All Context.

OK

This button saves any changes made and then closes the Voice Adjustment dialog box. This button is not available when changes are made to any factory default voice profile template. You must use the Save As button to save any changes made to a factory template.

Save As

Choose this button to save your current voice settings as part of a voice profile. Type a name for your voice profile or select an existing profile from the list. If you select an existing profile, that profile's individual voice settings will be overwritten by the new settings when you choose OK.

Apply

Use this button to apply and save any changes made to the voice profile settings without exiting the Voice Adjustment dialog box.

Cancel

When you select this button, any changes you have made are discarded, and the Voice Adjustment dialog box closes.

Related Topics:

Selecting a Voice Profile

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Add/Remove Voices

This utility enables you to seamlessly sample and install or remove the Vocalizer Expressive 2 voices used by JAWS, ZoomText, and Fusion. This avoids the need to download anything from external pages and makes the entire process much easier across all products. Once voices are set up for one product, there is no need to install them again for the other products.

To install a voice:

1.    From the JAWS main window, press ALT+O to open the Options menu, expand the Voices submenu, and then select Add/Remove Voices to open the Add/Remove Vocalizer Expressive Voices utility.

2.    In the Select a Language combo box, select the language that you want to download voices for.

3.    In the Premium Voices list box, press the SPACEBAR on the voices you want to install. You can select as many voices as you like. To hear a sample of the current voice before deciding if you want to select it, press ALT+P. If a voice is already installed, this will be indicated in the list.

4.    Select the Install Selected Voices button to begin the installation.

In JAWS and Fusion, after installing a premium voice, a profile is created for each of those new individual voices which can be further customized using the Voice Adjustment dialog box. You can also easily switch between all the new voices by pressing CTRL+INSERT+S to open the Select a Voice Profile dialog box, pressing the first letter of the voice you want to use, and then pressing ENTER. If you prefer not to have a profile generated for each installed voice, open the Voice Adjustment dialog box and clear the "Enable Additional Voice Profiles for installed Vocalizer Expressive 2 voices" check box so that only the standard Vocalizer Expressive factory and user profiles are listed.

To remove one or more voices:

1.    From the JAWS main window, press ALT+O to open the Options menu, expand the Voices submenu, and then select Add/Remove Voices to open the Add/Remove Vocalizer Expressive Voices utility.

2.    Select the Remove a Voice button.

3.    Use the SPACEBAR to select the voices you want to remove and then select the Remove Selected Voices button.

You can also remove all voices at once. When the Add/Remove Vocalizer Expressive Voices utility opens, select the Remove All Voices button.

Note: If you remove a voice that is currently in use, your JAWS, Fusion, or ZoomText will continue to speak using that voice until you restart the software or reboot the computer. Once you restart, it will default to the next profile available. If there are no more Vocalizer Expressive Voices available, JAWS and Fusion will default back to Eloquence.

If you find that compact voice collections had previously been installed, there is also an option to remove all compact voices. This is especially beneficial for users of Fusion or ZoomText 2018 or later which installs dozens of the compact voices by default. If you do not need all of these voices and languages, this makes it easy to remove all compact voices at once.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Adding Speech for Special Symbols

While JAWS correctly represents the most frequently used symbols with speech, you may need to add new ones. If you are reading a document and find that JAWS misrepresents or does not announce a symbol, do the following:

1.    Open Settings Center (INSERT+F2) and expand the Graphics and Symbols group.

2.    Select the Speak Character Value in Hex check box.

3.    Choose OK to save changes and close Settings Center.

4.    Return to your document. Move the cursor to a lowercase letter "a" (type one if none are present) and press NUM PAD 5 three times quickly. JAWS should say, “Character U+61HEX”. If you hear anything else, do not proceed with these steps.

5.    Move the cursor to the character whose speech representation you want to change and press NUM PAD 5 three times quickly to obtain the hexadecimal unicode value of the character. Be sure to make a note of this value, as you will need it in the next steps.

6.    Using a text editor like Notepad, open the SBL file for the active synthesizer. For example, Eloq.sbl. This file is located in the shared settings folder (C:\ProgramData\Freedom Scientific\JAWS\X (where X is the JAWS version number)\Settings).

Note: Character definitions are specific to your synthesizer and selected language. For example, if you are using Eloquence and American English, you should open the file named Eloq.sbl and modify the section named [American English].

8.    At the bottom of the appropriate section for your language, add a new entry for the specific symbol you want JAWS to speak. The entry should be in the following format:
 
 U+XXXX=SpokenRepresentation
 
 (Where XXXX is the unicode hexadecimal value of the symbol, and "SpokenRepresentation" is the desired pronunciation).

9.    Save your changes to the SBL file, and then quit and restart JAWS. Your speech changes should now take effect.

Related Topics:

Adding and Modifying Braille Symbols

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

About Cursors

JAWS provides many ways to access information and navigate within Windows. The cursor you use to access Windows determines what information JAWS reads. This section provides an overview of the means for accessing Windows, and detailed information on the cursors used within JAWS. You will find information on the following topics:

Using the PC Cursor

Using the JAWS Cursor

Using the Virtual PC Cursor

Using the Braille Cursor

Using the Touch Cursor

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Using the PC Cursor

The PC Cursor is the primary cursor used in JAWS. It corresponds to the system focus. The PC Cursor is used to navigate menus, edit text in documents, and to navigate in dialog boxes. The PC Cursor is used for most standard Windows functions, and provides a high degree of functionality. The PC Cursor is active when JAWS is first started, but if you switch to another cursor, you can press NUM PAD PLUS to make the PC Cursor active once again.

The PC Cursor can only go where the system focus can go, and this does limit the access it provides to the Windows environment.

See also:

JAWS Keystrokes for Reading Text

Navigation - Information Keystrokes

JAWS Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Using the JAWS Cursor

The JAWS Cursor is very useful when working in Windows. It corresponds to the system mouse. The JAWS Cursor is used to manipulate the system mouse, read static text to which the PC Cursor does not have access, and to access other parts of Windows to which the PC Cursor cannot be moved. The JAWS Cursor is also used to provide a quick overview of the information currently available on the screen. Press NUM PAD DASH to make the JAWS Cursor active.

Find information in the following areas:

Restricting the JAWS Cursor

Using the Mouse Buttons

Restricting the JAWS Cursor

The JAWS Cursor has several separate levels related to where it can move on the computer screen. Each time you press INSERT+R with the JAWS Cursor active, the next level of restriction is set and announced. The following describes these restrictions.

Real Window Restrictions

Technically, a real window is any window having a name. Although this is not always the case, most real windows have names. Examples of real windows include dialog boxes and application main windows. The Real Window Restriction limits the JAWS or Invisible cursors to these windows.

Application Window Restriction

When the JAWS Cursor is within the Parent Window with focus, the cursor does not move outside the Parent window when using standard navigation keys such as PAGE UP PAGE DOWN, HOME, END, or arrow keys.

Current Window Restriction

When put in this mode, the JAWS Cursor is restricted to the current window that it is in at that moment. This is useful to restrict movement and reading to a control such as a list box without having to hear other information outside of that specific control. The cursor does not move outside the Window with standard navigation keys such as PAGE UP PAGE DOWN, HOME, END, or arrow keys.

Focus Window Restriction

A focus window is the window that currently has the system focus. This generally refers to the window that contains the insertion point, caret, or highlight bar. Focus Window Restriction limits the JAWS or Invisible cursor to the window that currently has system focus. For example, an edit window where you type an e-mail reply is considered to be the focus window because it contains the insertion point or system focus.

Frame Restriction

When put in this mode, the JAWS Cursor is restricted to the current frame that it is in at that moment. This is useful to restrict movement and reading to an area of an application you define. The cursor does not move outside the frame with standard navigation keys such as PAGE UP PAGE DOWN, HOME, END, or arrow keys. For more information about frames, refer to Introduction to Frames.

Unrestricted

In Unrestricted Mode, with the JAWS Cursor active, you can freely roam the entire screen regardless of the number of Windows open or how they appear on the screen. Using this mode, you can easily browse the screen line by line and get an understanding of everything available on the screen.

Using the Mouse Buttons

The JAWS Cursor corresponds to the system mouse, allowing you to move the mouse pointer. JAWS provides the additional functionality of keystrokes to simulate clicking the mouse buttons. For more information, please see Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Using the Invisible Cursor

The Invisible Cursor allows you to move around the screen without changing the position of the PC Cursor or mouse pointer. You can use this cursor to read text and access options that you cannot move to with the PC Cursor. You can also use the Invisible Cursor to provide a quick overview of the information currently available on the screen. To activate the Invisible Cursor, press NUM PAD MINUS twice quickly. Use the standard JAWS reading commands to move the Invisible Cursor around the screen.

Like the JAWS Cursor, the movement of the Invisible Cursor is restricted by the boundaries of the window unless you change the cursor restriction by pressing INSERT+R. However, the Invisible Cursor is not visible on the screen because it does not bring the mouse pointer to its location.

Tip: For more information on restricting the Invisible Cursor, see Using the JAWS Cursor.

If you do not want to move the JAWS Cursor from its current position, it is recommended that you use the Invisible Cursor. For example, sometimes informative text appears on the screen, usually in the status bar, when the mouse pointer is at a particular location. If you try to use the JAWS Cursor to read this text, the mouse pointer moves with it and the text disappears.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Using the Virtual Cursor

Text in a web page is very much like the static text in a Windows status message. The PC Cursor cannot move to this text as there is no insertion point. The JAWS Cursor can access this text, but this is not the most effective way to access larger documents such as those often found on the Internet.

When using web-based applications such as Internet Explorer, JAWS provides the Virtual Cursor to simulate an insertion point. This provides you similar functionality to that found in any word processing application. Read text by word, line, sentence, or paragraph, or select and copy text to the Windows clipboard. The Virtual Cursor is active by default in applications that support it including Internet Explorer, Firefox, Chrome, Adobe Acrobat Reader, and when reading email messages in Microsoft Outlook or the Mail app in Windows 10. If you switch to another cursor, press NUM PAD PLUS to make the Virtual Cursor active again.

You can turn the Virtual Cursor off entirely, but this seriously limits functionality. Toggle the Virtual Cursor on and off by pressing INSERT+Z.

Routing the Virtual Cursor to the PC Cursor

Press INSERT+DELETE to route the Virtual Cursor to the PC Cursor. Using this command moves the Virtual Cursor to the current location of the PC Cursor. This makes using web forms easier, and is also useful on pages where a form control is automatically made active when the page loads.

Routing the PC Cursor to the Virtual Cursor

You can press CTRL+INSERT+DELETE to route the PC Cursor to the Virtual Cursor. Using this command moves the PC Cursor (and the application focus) to the current location of the Virtual Cursor. Visually, the page will scroll so that the area containing the Virtual Cursor is visible on the screen. This command is the opposite of the Route Virtual to PC Cursor command (INSERT+DELETE).

Routing the Virtual Cursor to the JAWS Cursor

You can press INSERT+NUM PAD PLUS to route the Virtual Cursor to the JAWS Cursor. Using this command moves the Virtual Cursor to the current location of the mouse pointer and can help sighted users navigate web pages.

Restricting the Virtual Cursor in Web-Based dialog boxes

If a dialog box appears on a web page as a result of an action such as activating a specific control, which can occur especially on pages that are part of a web-based application, JAWS restricts Virtual Cursor navigation to the dialog box. Sometimes, depending on how the web application is implemented, when focus moves into these dialog boxes, the content of the surrounding page is hidden until focus moves out of the dialog box. However, in many instances, the dialog content merges with the surrounding page which can be confusing especially when you only want to focus on the content in the web dialog box.

JAWS automatically restricts Virtual Cursor navigation to the dialog box when some action occurs that moves the focus into that dialog box. This includes navigating to an edit field in the dialog box with the ARROW keys and Auto Forms mode is enabled, navigating using the TAB or SHIFT+TAB keys, or activating a control on the page that automatically sets focus to the dialog box. When the Virtual Cursor is restricted, both speech and braille will only navigate content in the dialog box until restriction is disabled. The Virtual Cursor will be automatically unrestricted if you use the TAB or SHIFT+TAB keys to move focus away from the dialog box, or you perform an action in the dialog box that causes focus to be moved to another part of the page, or a completely new page loads.

You can also use the INSERT+R keystroke when focused in a web dialog box to manually toggle the Virtual Cursor between restricted and unrestricted. For instance, you may wish to unrestrict the Virtual Cursor to review page content outside of the dialog box without moving focus.

Note: In some web applications, surrounding page content is hidden when a dialog box is in focus, so unrestricting the Virtual Cursor to view content outside the dialog box will not always work in these situations.

See Also:

Using the Internet with JAWS

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Using the Braille Cursor

The Braille Cursor allows you to review text in a document, separate from any of the other cursors in JAWS. Unlike the other JAWS cursors, the Braille Cursor is not limited to one particular character. Instead, the term Braille Cursor refers to the line of text currently shown on the braille display. As you use a braille display, you may notice raised or blinking dots under one character. The dots represent the active cursor, which is usually the PC cursor.

Movement of the Braille Cursor is done solely through the use of the display that you are using. Some displays may have commands that are not available to others, and the commands to perform each action vary. Some of the commands available using most or all displays include:

·         Move the Braille Cursor up or down by line

·         Move the active cursor up or down by line

·         Route the Braille Cursor to either the JAWS or PC cursor

·         Link or unlink the Braille Cursor to the active cursor

·         Pan left or right on the current line

·         Route the PC Cursor to a particular character on the braille display

Linking Cursors

JAWS provides three ways to link your Braille Cursor with the active cursor. Each of these modes can be helpful at different times, and can be changed through Settings Center.

The Braille Cursor can be completely unlinked from the active cursor. This allows you to navigate using either the Braille or the active cursor, without changing the position of the other. However, if you change the active cursor from JAWS to PC or vice versa, the Braille Cursor moves to the location of the activated cursor.

The Braille Cursor can be set to follow the active cursor. In this mode, moving the active cursor causes the Braille Cursor to move. You can still move the Braille Cursor without moving the active cursor. Most braille displays have a command which can be used to toggle between this mode and the previous one.

You can choose to tether the Braille Cursor to the active cursor. In this mode, moving either the Braille or the active cursor causes the other to move. When moving the Braille Cursor, the active cursor follows but does not cause JAWS to speak.

Note: The above options only affect line mode. If you use structured mode, and are viewing a structured line, movement of either the Braille or the active cursor automatically moves both cursors.

 

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       | Next                  |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Using the Touch Cursor

Certain applications, especially many of the universal apps found in Windows 8.1 and Windows 10, do not always work as expected with JAWS when navigating with the standard cursors such as the PC and Virtual PC cursors. Activating the Touch Cursor enables you to use the ARROW keys on your computer's keyboard, or the controls on your braille display, to navigate through the elements in an application similar to using gestures on the touch screen of a tablet. Elements include everything from menu bars, toolbars, and progress bars, to form controls, regions, links, etc.

To activate the Touch Cursor, press SHIFT+NUM PAD PLUS, or SHIFT+CAPS LOCK+SEMICOLON if using the laptop keyboard layout. To turn it off, activate one of the other cursors, like the JAWS or PC Cursor. Pressing the PC Cursor command (NUM PAD PLUS) will cause JAWS to say "Touch Cursor" and the Touch Cursor will remain active. If Tutor Messages are enabled, JAWS will also speak the message "Double tap to activate PC cursor". Press the PC Cursor command twice quickly to turn off the Touch Cursor and activate the PC Cursor.

To automatically enable the Touch Cursor when focus moves into an application, press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings while focused in the application where you want to use the Touch Cursor, expand the Touch Cursor Options group, and then select Automatic Activation. You must do this for every application where you want to have JAWS automatically turn on the Touch Cursor.

Navigating With the Touch Cursor

To move to the next or previous element on the screen, press RIGHT or LEFT ARROW. You can also use TAB or SHIFT+TAB.

To move by a specific element type, press UP or DOWN ARROW. By default, the UP and DOWN ARROWS will move by regions. To change what element type these commands move by, press PAGE UP or PAGE DOWN to cycle through the available types using the navigation rotor.

For example, if you want the UP or DOWN ARROW keys to move by headings, press PAGE UP or PAGE DOWN until you hear "headings. Now, pressing UP or DOWN ARROW will move to the next or previous heading.

Press CTRL+HOME to move to the first element and press CTRL+END to move to the last element. To announce the current element, press INSERT+UP ARROW. To perform a Say All, which will cause the Touch Cursor to move through the application and speak each element, press INSERT+DOWN ARROW.

As you navigate using the ARROW keys, the system focus does not follow the Touch Cursor. This allows you to freely navigate through elements without changing the position of the PC Cursor or mouse pointer. Pressing SPACEBAR or ENTER on the current element will move focus to that element and perform the appropriate action. For instance, opening a menu, selecting a check box, or activating a button or link. In addition, a lime green rectangle will be displayed around the currently selected element to visually indicate the location of the Touch cursor for sighted users.

To quickly move the Touch Cursor to the element that currently has focus, press INSERT+NUM PAD PLUS, or CAPS LOCK+APOSTROPHE if using the laptop keyboard layout. JAWS will route the Touch Cursor to the currently selected element and announce it. The Touch Cursor will remain active after performing this command.

To determine what element types will be announced as you navigate with the Touch Cursor, press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings, expand the Touch Cursor Options group, then move to Configure Types. This group lists all available types that can be navigated to using the Touch Cursor. Use the SPACEBAR to select or clear a type. Types that are selected are announced while types that are not selected are ignored.

Note: The Configure Types option only appears in Quick Settings if the Touch Cursor is currently active when Quick Settings is opened.

Touch Cursor Navigation Quick Keys

While the Touch Cursor is active, you can use Navigation Quick Keys to quickly jump to various types of elements, such as regions, headings, links, form controls, and so on. These commands are similar to the Navigation Quick Keys that are used when navigating HTML and PDF documents with the Virtual PC Cursor.

By default, Touch Navigation Quick Keys are not enabled when the Touch Cursor is activated. This allows you to fully use applications that support typing in the main window.

If you would like Touch Navigation Quick keys to be enabled automatically when the Touch Cursor is activated in a specific application, press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings while focused in the application, navigate to the Touch Cursor Options group, and select Touch Quick Keys. You can also press INSERT+Z while the Touch Cursor is active to temporarily toggle Touch Navigation Quick Keys on or off.

The following Navigation Quick Keys are available:

Note: You can add the SHIFT Key to any of these commands to move to the previous occurrence of that element.

·         A - Next radio button

·         B - Next button

·         C - Next combo box

·         D - Next document

·         E - Next edit field

·         F - Next form field

·         G - Next image

·         H - Next heading

·         I - Next list item

·         K - Next link

·         L - Next list

·         M - Next menu

·         O - Next tool bar

·         P - Next pane

·         Q - Next tab

·         R - Next region

·         S - Next occurrence of static text

·         T - Next table

·         U - Next group

·         V - Next tree view

·         X - Next check box

·         Z - Next status bar

Text Review

Text Review allows you to read the text contained inside an element using standard reading commands. If the element at the current Touch Cursor position has text, such as a news article, pressing NUM PAD SLASH or INSERT+ENTER will activate Text Review. You can then use the ARROW keys to read the text as if you were reading a regular document. Pressing the ESC key will exit Text Review and return to Touch Cursor navigation.

By default, JAWS will play a sound when you enter or exit Text Review mode. If you would rather have JAWS speak a message, press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings, expand the Touch Cursor Options group, and clear the Use Sounds option.

Advanced Navigation

For advanced users, specifically those who may be involved with developing applications, Advanced Navigation provides more detail about all elements in the UIA (User Interface Automation) structure.

With the standard Touch Cursor, you can only navigate to elements that are visible on the screen in the current application. In Advanced Navigation, the Touch Cursor traverses all UIA elements in a hierarchical manner. All elements, whether visible or not, can be traversed in Advanced Navigation.

To enable Advanced Navigation, press NUM PAD STAR, or CAPS LOCK+A if using the laptop keyboard layout, while the Touch Cursor is active. Once active, use the LEFT or RIGHT ARROW keys to move to the previous or next sibling element and the UP or DOWN ARROW keys to move to the parent element or the first child element. To view more Advanced Navigation commands, press INSERT+H while this mode is active. Press NUM PAD STAR once more to turn off Advanced Navigation and return to the standard Touch Cursor.

See also:

Using JAWS with a Touch Screen

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Using JAWS with a Touch Screen

If you have a computer running Windows 8 or later that includes a touch screen, such as the Surface™ Pro tablet from Microsoft, you can control JAWS directly from the touch screen. To use a touch screen, you will use one or more fingers to perform various gestures right on the surface of the device's screen to control JAWS and the tablet. To take full advantage of this feature, you need a touch screen that offers five or more touch points. This topic describes how you can use a touch screen to control JAWS.

Gestures

Exploring the Screen

Touch Modes

Using the Windows Touch Keyboard

JAWS Specific Touch Gestures

Gestures

Performing JAWS and Windows commands from a touch screen is accomplished by different touch gestures using one or more fingers. Gestures include taps, flicks, swipes, rotating, and pinching. The following sections describe these gestures.

Taps

Tap the screen quickly with one or more fingers. Tapping with one finger is called a tap, using 2 fingers is a 2-finger tap, and so on.

Tapping more than once quickly performs a multi-tap gesture. Tapping twice is a double tap, and three times is a triple tap. Placing and holding one finger on the screen while simultaneously tapping with a second finger is called a split tap. You can also use more than one finger in multi-tap gestures. For example, you can do a 2-finger double tap or three-finger triple tap.

Flicks and Swipes

Flicking and swiping are the primary navigation gestures and are used constantly. To flick, move one or more fingers very quickly across the screen in the direction of the flick. You can flick up, down, left, or right. For example, flick up, or two-finger flick right.

A swipe is very similar to a flick except that you drag one or more fingers in a slower motion across the screen in a particular direction. You can swipe up, down, left, or right. For example, two-finger swipe up, or three-finger swipe right. You can also swipe in one direction and then quickly swipe in a different direction. For instance, two-finger swipe up-down, or three-finger swipe right-up.

Rotate

Place two or more fingers on the screen and then turn them in a circular motion either clockwise or counterclockwise as if you were turning a dial.

Pinch

To pinch in, place your thumb and index finger on the screen and pinch them together. To pinch out, place your thumb and index finger together on the screen and then spread them apart.

Exploring the Screen

When you place a finger on the screen, JAWS will announce the element under your finger. You can then move your finger around the screen and JAWS will announce each element you encounter. As you explore, you can perform a split tap or a split double tap to have JAWS announce the character or word at the location of your finger. Elements can be anything from buttons, links, and lists of items, to edit fields, headings, and regions. This is a good way to explore and find out what items are available and where they are located.

When you lift your finger and then tap the screen once, the current element at that point is spoken. If you perform a double tap at that current point, the current element is activated. Once you become familliar with the location of various elements, you can tap the part of the screen containing the particular element instead of having to explore to locate it. For example, in the Windows Mail app, the Preview pane where the message body is displayed for the user, is positioned on the right side of the screen. So if you have moved through the inbox, and then want to move your focus to the message you are on, tapping on the right side of the screen will quickly get you to the message.

Touch Modes

The two-finger rotate gesture allows you to cycle between three gesture modes; Touch Navigation, Text Reading, and Speech Settings. Certain touch gestures will work differently depending on which mode is active. The following sections describe each mode.

Touch Navigation

In Touch Navigation mode, which is always the default mode, gestures move you to various elements on the screen.

To move to the next or previous element, flick right or flick left.

To move by a specific element type, flick down or flick up. To change what element type these gestures move by, perform a two-finger flick left or right to cycle through the available types using the navigation rotor.

For example, if you want the flick down and flick up gestures to move by headings, flick left or right with two fingers until you hear "headings. Now, flicking down or up will move to the next or previous heading.

Double tapping on the current element will move focus to that element and perform the appropriate action. For instance, opening a menu, selecting a check box, or activating a button or link. To move focus to an element without activating it, perform a three-finger flick right or three-finger flick left.

To have JAWS read all elements on the screen, perform a two-finger flick down.

Text Reading

Text Reading mode allows you to use gestures to navigate through text as well as select and edit content. In addition to using the two-finger rotate gesture, Text Reading mode will also automatically be activated when you double tap on a text element that supports cursor navigation, such as an article in the News app, or the text area of an editing application like Microsoft Word. When Text Reading is activated using a double tap on a text element, for instance, the second paragraph of a document, JAWS attempts to position the cursor at the location of the double tap.

Note: Positioning the cursor may not work in all applications due to the level of UIA support provided by the specific application.

If you explore away from the text element to another item that does not support text reading, JAWS will automatically switch back to Touch Navigation.

To move to the next or prior character, perform a flick right or flick left. This is the same as pressing LEFT or RIGHT ARROW.

To move to the next or prior word, perform a two-finger flick right or two-finger flick left. This is the same as pressing CTRL+LEFT or CTRL+RIGHT ARROW.

To move to the next or prior line, perform a flick down or flick up. This is the same as pressing DOWN or UP ARROW.

To move to the next or prior paragraph, perform a two-finger flick down or two-finger flick up. This is the same as pressing CTRL+DOWN or CTRL+UP ARROW.

To move to the next or previous page or screen, depending on the application, perform a four-finger flick down or up. This is the same as pressing PAGE DOWN or PAGE UP.

To move to the beginning or end of the current line, perform a three-finger flick left or right. This is the same as pressing HOME or END.

To move to the top or bottom of the text, perform a three-finger flick up or down. This is the same as pressing CTRL+HOME or CTRL+END.

To begin a Say All, perform a four-finger swipe down. This is similar to pressing INSERT+DOWN ARROW and begins reading from the current location in the document. Tapping once anywhere on the screen stops reading as if you pressed the CTRL key.

Performing a triple tap toggles text selection on or off. When selection is enabled, using any of the above text reading gestures will select the specific unit as well as move to it. For example, to move to and select the next line, perform a triple tap and then flick down. Text will continue being selected as you navigate until you perform a triple tap again to turn it off. Perform a two-finger triple tap to have JAWS read the selected text.

Speech Settings

Speech Settings mode gives you a quick way to change commonly used settings that might normally require several steps to access. Currently, you can adjust the speech rate and change the main system volume.

To increase or decrease the speech rate, perform a flick right or flick left.

To increase or decrease the main volume, perform a flick up or flick down.

Text Review

When you encounter an element that does not support standard cursor navigation, such as a button, or an item in a list, performing a three-finger swipe down then up opens a Virtual Viewer window containing the name of the element. You can then use the navigation gestures described above to review this information. This is useful if you want to review a control in greater detail that you did not quite understand when it was announced by JAWS during exploration or when tapping it. Performing the three-finger swipe down then up gesture again will close the Virtual Viewer.

When this mode is active, you will not be able to navigate to other items on the screen. If you explore outside of the Virtual Viewer, JAWS plays a sound to indicate you are no longer in the window.

Note: The three-finger swipe down then up gesture will not activate Text Review if it is used on a text element that supports standard cursor navigation, or if the element does not have a name, such as an unlabeled graphic.

Using the Windows Touch Keyboard

JAWS offers full support for the Windows touch keyboard, enabling you to write documents, email messages, and fill out forms on the Internet right on your device's touch screen if you do not have access to a physical keyboard. While a regular keyboard is still recommended for writing lengthy documents or performing complex editing tasks, using the Touch keyboard is convenient for writing a quick note, composing or replying to an email, or filling out a form on a web site.

To activate the Touch Keyboard, perform a four-finger swipe down then up. JAWS announces "opened Touch Keyboard" and plays an ascending sound. Once enabled, the keyboard is positioned in the bottom part of the screen and each key is represented by a button. Use flick gestures to move to each key, or drag your finger around the screen to explore and locate keys. While exploring, JAWS plays a unique set of sounds to alert you when you enter or leave the area of the screen containing the touch keyboard. Once you become familliar with the touch keyboard layout, you can tap at the location of each key.

To close the touch keyboard, perform another four-finger swipe down then up. JAWS announces "closed touch keyboard" and plays a descending sound.

Note: To change how JAWS notifies you when the touch keyboard opens and closes, open Settings Center and navigate to the Touch Keyboard Notification option. Use the SPACEBAR to cycle through the available options.

Typing Mode

When typing, there are two modes available:

·         Touch Typing: A key is typed when the finger is lifted from any of the keyboard buttons, or a split tap is performed on the selected keyboard button. If alternative characters are available for the currrent keyboard button, a split double tap will open a panel of alternative keys related to the selected key. Performing a split double tap on any keyboard button in the alternative characters panel will close the panel.

·         Standard Typing: A key is typed when a double tap or split tap is performed on the screen after exploring to any of the keyboard buttons. If alternative characters are available for the currrent keyboard button, a triple tap will open a panel of alternative keys related to the selected key. Performing a triple tap on any keyboard button in the alternative characters panel will close the panel.

By default, JAWS uses Touch Typing, which means that a key is typed as soon as the finger is lifted from a keyboard button, or you perform a split tap. To change the typing mode, open Settings Center and navigate to the Touch Typing Mode setting. Use the SPACEBAR to toggle between Standard Typing or Touch Typing.

Note: To change how JAWS indicates when the panel of alternative characters opens or closes, open Settings Center and navigate to the Touch Alternative Character Panel Popup Notification option. Use the SPACEBAR to cycle through the available options.

Typing Echo

Just like when typing on a physical keyboard, you can configure how much feedback you receive when typing using the Touch Keyboard. To change this, open Settings Center and navigate to the Touch Typing Echo setting. Use the SPACEBAR to cycle through the available options. You may choose either Characters, Words, Both Characters and Words, or None so that JAWS remains silent as you type using the touch keyboard. By default, JAWS ehcos both characters and words as you type.

Note: This option allows you to configure the feedback for the touch keyboard separate from the feedback for the physical keyboard. This means you can have JAWS say nothing when using a regular keyboard, but continue to announce both characters and words when using the touch keyboard.

JAWS Specific Touch Gestures

The following tables list the available JAWS commands that can be performed using touch gestures:

Gestures for Touch Navigation, Text Reading, and Speech Settings

  ---------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------
  Gesture                            Touch Navigation                                                                                                                                                                          Text Reading                                                                                                                                                                 Speech Settings
  One-finger tap                     Speak the element at the current location (continuously move your finger around the screen to explore)                                                                                    Speak the element at the current location (continuously move your finger around the screen to explore)                                                                       -
  Split tap                          Speak the character at the current location while exploring, or activate the selected Touch Keyboard button in both Standard and Touch Typing modes                                       Speak the character at the current location while exploring, or activate the selected Touch Keyboard button in both Standard and Touch Typing modes                          -
  Split double tap                   Speak the word at the current location while exploring, or open and close the panel of alternative keys related to the selected Touch Keyboard button in Touch Typing mode                Speak the word at the current location while exploring, or open and close the panel of alternative keys related to the selected Touch Keyboard button in Touch Typing mode   -
  Flick right or left                Next or prior element                                                                                                                                                                     Next or prior character                                                                                                                                                      Increase or decrease speech rate
  Flick down or up                   Next or prior element (of the type previously set by two-finger flick right or left) or changes the value in slider controls                                                              Next or prior line (or anywhere that up/down arrow works to move by line)                                                                                                    Decrease or increase main volume settings
  Two-finger flick right or left     Cycle forward or backward through element navigation types, such as regions, headings, list items, etc.                                                                                   Next or prior word                                                                                                                                                           -
  Two-finger flick up                Say current element                                                                                                                                                                       Prior paragraph (Actually performs a CTRL+UP ARROW)                                                                                                                          -
  Two-finger flick down              Say all                                                                                                                                                                                   Next paragraph (Actually performs a CTRL+DOWN ARROW)                                                                                                                         -
  Triple tap                         Select or clear an item in a list; decrease value in slider control; open and close the panel of alternative keys related to the selected Touch Keyboard button in Standard Typing mode   Toggle text selection, or open and close the panel of alternative keys related to the selected Touch Keyboard button in Standard Typing mode                                 Toggles touch cursor on/off
  Two-finger triple tap              Speak selected text                                                                                                                                                                       Speak selected text                                                                                                                                                          -
  Three-finger flick right or left   Performs a TAB or SHIFT+TAB                                                                                                                                                               End or beginning of current line (Actually performs a JAWS END/HOME)                                                                                                         -
  Three-finger flick up or down      Cycle between application panes similar to pressing F6 or SHIFT+F6                                                                                                                        Beginning or end of text area (Actually performs a CTRL+HOME/END)                                                                                                            -
  Four-finger flick up or down       First or last element                                                                                                                                                                     Move up or down by page or screen (Actually performs a PAGE UP/DOWN)                                                                                                         -
  Four-finger swipe down             -                                                                                                                                                                                         Say All (a single tap anywhere on the screen stops reading)                                                                                                                  -
  Four-finger swipe down-up          Toggles Windows touch keyboard on/off                                                                                                                                                     Toggles Windows touch keyboard on/off                                                                                                                                        -
  Four-finger double tap             List gestures for touch navigation                                                                                                                                                        List gestures for text reading                                                                                                                                               List gestures for speech settings
  ---------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------

Gestures for General Windows and JAWS Commands

  ------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Gesture                               Action
  Double tap                            Activate the current element or Touch Keyboard button in Standard Typing mode (Works for both touch navigation and text reading)
  Two-finger swipe right-left           Escape (Actually performs ESC for both touch navigation and text reading)
  Two-finger swipe up-down              Close application (For both touch navigation and text reading)
  Three-finger swipe down-up            Toggle text review window for elements with text names that do not support standard cursor navigation, such as buttons and list items
  Two-finger tap                        Silence speech
  Two-finger double tap                 Applications key
  Two-finger rotate clockwise           Set next gesture mode
  Two-finger rotate counter clockwise   Set prior gesture mode
  Three-finger double tap               Toggle speech on/off
  Four-finger tap                       Display gesture context help
  Four-finger triple tap                Gesture practice mode, similar to keyboard help
  Four-finger rotate                    Passes the next gesture through to Windows
  Five-finger tap                       JAWS Manager dialog box (If the gesture mode is not already set to touch when this command is used, the mode is set to touch.)
  Five-finger double tap                JAWS window (If the gesture mode is not already set to touch when this command is used, the mode is set to touch.)
  Five-finger triple tap                Shut down JAWS (If the gesture mode is not already set to touch when this command is used, the mode is set to touch.)
  Five-finger rotate                    Toggle JAWS gestures off and on
  ------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

See also:

JAWS Gesture Settings

JAWS Touch Keyboard Settings

Using the Touch Cursor

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Overview of the JAWS Utilities

JAWS provides several utilities used to customize how JAWS works with the applications you use. Customizing JAWS allows you to make any changes that might be necessary to provide you more complete access to your programs. This topic provides an overview of the JAWS utilities.

The Run JAWS Manager Dialog

Press INSERT+F2 at any time for quick access to a dialog listing the JAWS Managers and utilities. The managers and utilities available in this dialog are listed below with a brief description of each.

Commands Search

The JAWS Command Search feature enables you to enter a full or partial description of a JAWS command whose keystroke you do not remember and displays a list of results that match your search criteria. The results include the name of the command, a brief description, and the keystrokes that are used to perform the command. For more information, refer to JAWS Command Search.

Custom Highlight Assign

Use Custom Highlight Assign to specify colors that are then recognized by JAWS as highlighted. This is very useful in applications that do not use Windows colors, or do not allow you to modify preset color settings. For more information, please refer to Custom Highlight Colors.

Custom Label, Custom Label Delete, and Custom Label Delete All

These options are only available in Internet Explorer, Adobe Acrobat/Reader, Microsoft Word, and HTML documents that use the virtual cursor. Use the Custom Label option to assign a custom label to the current HTML link, HTML image, or form field/control. Use the Custom Label Delete option to delete the label assigned to the current item. Use the Custom Label Delete All option to delete all custom labels on the current page or document. For more information on using this feature, see Custom Labels.

Customize List View

A list view is an area in a window or dialog box that contains one or more items, such as files, folders, records, and so on. The list view usually contains multiple columns that display information about each item in the list. You can use the Customize List View feature to change how JAWS provides you with information about the columns and items in certain list views. For more information, please refer to Customizing List Views.

Dictionary Manager

Use Dictionary Manager to specify how JAWS pronounces words, allowing you to more easily recognize spoken information and to work more effectively. For more information, please refer to Dictionary Manager.

Flexible Web

Use Flexible Web to hide content on Web pages that may interrupt the reading experience, such as advertisements. You can also specify where JAWS begins reading on a specific page. For more information, please refer to Flexible Web.

Frame Viewer

Use Frame Viewer to specify areas within an application window that can then be set to be read with a keystroke, in response to some change in the program, or to silence a change in the application that you do not want to hear. For more information, please refer to Frame Viewer

Graphics Labeler

Graphics Labeler allows you to assign text labels to graphics. The text labels are then automatically read when labeled graphics are encountered by the active cursor. For more information, please refer to Graphics Labeler.

Keyboard Manager

Use Keyboard Manager to review, add, or change keystrokes assigned to listed actions. For more information, please refer to Keyboard Manager.

Mark Colors in Braille

Use Mark Colors in Braille to specify text colors to be identified when the Color attribute is selected in the Braille Marking group in Settings Center. For more information, see Braille Group options.

Navigation Quick Keys 

Use this manager to view a list of the current Navigation Quick Key assignments for the actions associated with the current application. For more, see Navigation Quick Keys Manager.

Prompt Creator/Modifier

Prompts are the labels spoken when you navigate to a control. However, these labels are not always automatically spoken. Use Prompt Creator to specify the label JAWS speaks for specific controls, and even include a custom tutor message to provide helpful navigation tips. For more information, refer to Creating a Prompt.

Quick Settings

Use Quick Settings to change settings in the application that is currently active. For more information, see Quick Settings Overview.

Research It

Research It allows you to access data and then easily return to your primary task. It uses what is known as a lookup source and the Results Viewer. You can use it to find information, whether it is the meaning of a word, your local weather forecast, top news stories, directions to and information about a local business, and more. For more information, see Research It.

Script Manager

Use Script Manager to write and compile scripts - small programs - that can greatly alter how JAWS functions within applications. For more information on Script Manager and writing scripts, please refer to Characteristics of the Script Manager.

Settings Center

Settings Center allows you to modify many settings that determine what information JAWS reads, and how much of it is read. You can also modify configuration settings for braille options and synthesizer options. For more information, please refer to Settings Center.

Skim Reading Tool

Use the Skim Reading Tool to change your skim reading preferences. This also allows you to create, select, edit, and delete skim reading text rules. You can start skim reading with your current preferences at any time by pressing CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW. For more information, please refer to Skim Reading Dialog.

Window Class Reassign

A Windows class is a programming level label for a window or control. Some programs use non-standard Window classes, making it difficult for JAWS to recognize and read them properly. Windows Class Reassign allows you to specify a standard Windows class assignment that JAWS can recognize and access. For more information, please refer to Window Classes Dialog.

Default or Application Settings

Settings changed in the JAWS managers and utilities can be made at a default or application level. Default level changes affect all applications, while application level changes affect only the current application. For example, if you press INSERT+F2 and select a manager while Word is active, changes you make only apply to Word.

In several of the managers, if you press CTRL+SHIFT+D before making changes, your changes take place on a default level.

 

  ------ --- --------------
  Back       Next Section
  ------ --- --------------

Using the Clipboard

The Clipboard is a Windows feature that allows you to copy items from one location and then paste them in another location. You can copy text from form fields, web pages, documents, edit boxes, the JAWS Virtual Viewer, and any other place where you can select text. You can also copy files in Windows Explorer. Items that you copy are placed on the Clipboard, an invisible region that operates in the background throughout Windows. When you copy an item to the Clipboard, it replaces any item that was already there. The keystroke for copying the currently selected item to the Clipboard in any program is always CTRL+C.

The Cut command is similar to the Copy command. However, items that you cut are deleted, in addition to being copied to the Clipboard. The Cut command is useful for moving items to other locations. The keystroke for the Cut command is always CTRL+X.

To tell Windows which item you want to copy or cut, you must select it first. The process for selecting items varies by program. For information on selecting files in Windows Explorer, see Using Windows Explorer. To select text, use the following Windows commands:

·         Select the next character to the left of the cursor – SHIFT+LEFT ARROW

·         Select the next character to the right of the cursor – SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW

·         Select the next word to the left of the cursor - CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT ARROW

·         Select the next word to the right of the cursor – CTRL+SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW

·         Select all text between the cursor and the beginning of the line – SHIFT+HOME

·         Select all text between the cursor and the end of the line – SHIFT+END

·         Select all text between the cursor and the beginning of the current document – CTRL+SHIFT+HOME

·         Select all text between the cursor and the end of the current document – CTRL+SHIFT+END

·         Select all text in the current document – CTRL+A

When reading web pages and PDF documents, or when working with documents in editing applications such as Word, Notepad, or Wordpad, you can quickly select large blocks of text. Press CTRL+WINDOWS Key+K to mark the beginning of the selection, navigate until you reach the end of the text you want to select, and then press INSERT+SPACEBAR, followed by M. This acts the same way as clicking and dragging a mouse over text.

After you select the text you want to copy, press CTRL+C or CTRL+X to place that text on the Clipboard.

Note: To read the Clipboard contents, press WINDOWS Key+INSERT+X.

Pasting Items

Any items that you have placed on the Clipboard can be inserted, or "pasted," into a document, edit box, folder, and other locations. To paste an item from the Clipboard, press CTRL+V. If there is text on the Clipboard, it is inserted at the current location of the PC Cursor. The item that you pasted remains on the Clipboard, so you can copy it elsewhere if necessary.

Using FSClipboard

FSClipboard extends the functionality of the Windows Clipboard. When you use the Windows Copy (CTRL+C) or Cut (CTRL+X) commands to place text on the Clipboard, it replaces any text already there. When using the FSClipboard feature, text that you copy is added to any text that you have previously copied to the Clipboard. This allows you to continue adding text to the Clipboard until you are ready to paste it into a document. You can only copy text with the FSClipboard feature.

To add text to the Clipboard, select it using the text selection commands, and then press INSERT+WINDOWS Key+C. The text is appended to the end of any text already on the Clipboard. To paste all the text that you have placed on the Clipboard so far, use the Windows Paste command (CTRL+V). The text is inserted into your document at the current location of the cursor. Each block of text that you copied is separated by a blank line.

Note: If you attempt to add the same selection of text to the Clipboard more than once, the text is not added. This feature is intended to reduce unintentional duplication.

All formatting is removed from text that you copy using the FSClipboard feature. This can be useful in programs like Microsoft Word if you do not want to include styles, numbering, and other formatting information when you paste text into a document.

If you want to replace all of the text on the Clipboard with a new text selection, use CTRL+C or CTRL+X instead of WINDOWS Key+C. JAWS asks if you want to overwrite your previously saved items. Choose Yes to replace all the text on the Clipboard with the new selection.

Viewing the Contents of the Clipboard

If text has been copied to the Clipboard, you can press the layered keystroke INSERT+SPACEBAR, C to display the contents of the Clipboard in the Results Viewer. The title of the Results Viewer window that contains the Clipboard contents is called Clipboard Text.

For example, you could use CTRL+C to copy text to the Clipboard, then use INSERT+WINDOWS Key+C to append text to the Clipboard from other sources. Once you have added all of the text you want, press INSERT+SPACEBAR followed by C to display the Clipboard contents in the Results Viewer. At this point, you can choose any portion of the text in the Results Viewer window and copy it to the clipboard. Once you do this, the clipboard text is overwritten and the text previously collected is no longer associated with the clipboard. However, the text is still available in the Results Viewer, as long as that window stays open. This means you can repeatedly copy any text to the clipboard and paste it wherever you want.

You could also use CTRL+C to copy a large block of text to the Clipboard, press INSERT+SPACEBAR, C to display it in the Results Viewer, and then select and copy smaller blocks of text from the clipboard text viewer to paste in different locations.

Note: When using CTRL+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW to select by paragraph, text that was broken up into several paragraphs in the original document it was copied from may only be considered one paragraph in the Clipboard Text viewer. This is because appending text to the Clipboard may strip text to a single paragraph. In most cases, paragraphs are indicated by two blank lines between text. However, in applications like Microsoft Word, a paragraph can begin where a style changes, such as going from a heading to normal body text. These style changes are removed when using INSERT+WINDOWS Key+C to append the selection to the Clipboard, which results in only one paragraph.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Window List Dialog Box

This topic documents the settings available in the Window List dialog box. This dialog allows you to switch between running applications. To access this dialog, press INSERT+F10.

Running Applications

This list box lists the running applications that are displayed on the task bar. The window state of each application is also listed. The window state will be minimized, restored, or maximized. You can select a listed application and press ENTER to switch to that application.

Only Include On Top Windows

Select this check box to make it easier to interact with topmost windows, often referred to as On Top windows. These are application windows that pop up, without gaining focus or being in the ALT+TAB order. These are often found with firewall or antivirus programs and are intended to interrupt and provide information that must be acted on before continuing. You cannot minimize them or press ALT+TAB to move focus to another application.

When this check box is selected, the On Top windows are included in the JAWS Task List (also known as the Window List dialog box) so that you can check to see if one of these windows is present. If it is, you can switch focus to the window from the Window List dialog box using the Switch To button. You can quickly identify On Top windows in the Window List because they include the term "On Top" in the name.

Switch To

This button allows you to switch to the application selected in the Running Applications list box.

Cancel

This button allows you to exit the Window List dialog box without switching to a different application.

About

This button allows you to view a dialog containing copyright information for the Window List dialog box.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Select a System Tray Icon Dialog Box

This topic documents the settings available in the Select a System Tray Icon dialog box. This dialog box allows you to access items in the system tray. To access this dialog box, press INSERT+F11.

System Tray Icon

This list box lists the icons that are displayed in the system tray. Select an item from the list and press ENTER to simulate a right single click of the mouse on the item. This will normally bring up a context menu providing access to the item’s options.

Right Single Click

This button can be used to simulate a right single click on the item currently selected in the System Tray Icon list box.

Left Single Click

This button can be used to simulate a left single click on the item currently selected in the System Tray Icon list box.

Left Double Click

This button can be used to simulate a left double click on the item currently selected in the System Tray Icon list box.

Cancel

This button allows you to exit the Select a System Tray Icon dialog box without taking any action on any system tray icons.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Select a Symbol to Print Dialog Box

This topic documents the Select a Symbol to Print dialog box. This dialog allows you to insert certain symbols into a document. To access this feature, press INSERT+4.

Symbols List

This list box contains textual descriptions of the symbols that you can insert into your document. To insert the selected symbol, press ENTER or activate the OK Button.

Cancel

Activating the Cancel Button closes the dialog box without inserting any symbols.

 

 

  ------ --- --------------
  Back       Next Section
  ------ --- --------------

 

Browsing the Internet

Web browsers are programs that allow you to access web pages on the Internet, read HTML documents on your computer, or view your local intranet site. These browsers don't just display information. They also help you find information using search engines, purchase products online using various online shopping sites, interact with other people using social media services, use web-based editing applications to create documents, and much more.

JAWS works best with the latest versions of Google Chrome, Microsoft Internet Explorer, Mozilla Firefox, and Microsoft Edge. JAWS provides the same powerful features for each supported browser, allowing you to choose the one that best suits your needs.

When browsing the web, JAWS gives you quick access to the information you need, and provides detailed information about the structure and organization of web pages. Tables, lists, headings, and alternate text for images are all announced. The information comes right from the HTML used to create the page. HTML is designed with accessibility in mind, and JAWS supports more of the built-in HTML accessibility features than any other screen reader.

Any time you read an HTML document, JAWS uses the Virtual Cursor. With the Virtual Cursor, you can read web pages using the standard JAWS reading commands, use the TAB key to move through links and easily follow them, display lists of links or headings to quickly find and move to what you need, and easily move to and fill out web-based forms.

Use the links below to learn more about using JAWS on the Internet as well as the commands, keystrokes, and verbosity options for working with HTML documents.

JAWS Commands for HTML

Navigating Web Pages

Customizing Your Web Settings

Surf's Up

Please visit Surf's Up! – Surfing the Internet with JAWS for a series of tutorials describing how to use JAWS with HTML pages.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Convenient OCR

The Convenient OCR (Optical Character Recognition) feature enables you to access any image that includes textual information as part of the image. With just a few simple keystrokes, JAWS can:

·         Recognize images captured using the Freedom Scientific PEARL® reading camera or a flatbed scanner and display recognized text in the Results Viewer. The PEARL is a highly portable document camera that allows you to capture and recognize a page within seconds and also features an automatic mode that senses motion which causes it to capture an image whenever a page is turned.

·         Recognize an image file selected in File Explorer and display its recognized contents in the Results Viewer.

·         Recognize an inaccessible PDF document currently open in Adobe Reader and display the recognized text in the Results Viewer.

·         Recognize images on the screen that may contain text such as the setup window of an application or a menu of selections for a DVD movie.

To use Convenient OCR, the following layered keystrokes are available:

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, A. Recognizes images captured from a camera or scanner.

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, F. Recognizes the currently selected image file.

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, D. Recognizes the currently open PDF document.

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, W. Recognizes the current application window that has focus.

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, S. Recognizes the entire screen.

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, C. Recognizes the currently selected control, such as a graphical button.

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, Q. Cancels recognition while it is in progress.

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, QUESTION MARK. Speaks a brief help message describing the commands in the OCR layer.

Note that to correctly recognize text in other languages, you can configure the primary and secondary OCR language. The Convenient OCR settings are in the main tree view in Settings Center. When you expand this item, you have Primary Recognition Language and Secondary Recognition Language settings. Use the SPACEBAR to cycle through the available languages until you hear the one you want, or press F6 to move to the combo box and select a language.

When you install JAWS from the program disc, the OCR components are automatically installed. If you download JAWS from the web and have an active Internet connection when you begin the installation, the OCR components will be downloaded during the install. If you do not have an active Internet connection when you install JAWS from the web download, a message is displayed at the end of the installation stating that some components were not installed. To use the OCR feature, establish an Internet connection and run the installation again so the OCR components are downloaded.

Recognizing Images from the PEARL Camera or a Scanner

To acquire and read a document with the PEARL camera, position a page under the camera aligned with the page guide, and then press INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, A to open the Camera and Scanner Recognition dialog box. Make sure PEARL is selected in the Cameras and Scanners combo box and then press ENTER or choose the Acquire button to start the single-page OCR. Once recognition is complete, JAWS displays the text in the Results Viewer where you can use standard reading commands to review the text or select and copy it to other applications. During the recognition process, JAWS also announces the page orientation such as "sideways", "upside down", or "right side up." This is especially helpful for users who need to make sure a page is positioned correctly for folding and inserting into an envelope so the correct information is showing through the window.

Note: The field of view that can be captured by the PEARL is 9 inches by 12 inches.

To acquire multiple images, after pressing INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, A, select the Motion Detect Multi-Page Recognition check box before activating the Acquire button to start capturing documents. When you hear JAWS play a camera shudder sound, the current image has been captured and you can place a new page under the camera or turn the page in a book. Once the PEARL no longer detects motion, the next image is captured and recognized. Once you are finished recognizing pages, press INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, A again to stop recognition. You can also select the Timeout check box to have recognition stop automatically if the PEARL detects no motion for 30 seconds.

By default, the PEARL's built-in light is always on during image capture and OCR. If you want the light to automatically turn on only when the camera detects low lighting conditions, or you prefer to have the light always off, use the Light combo box to change this setting.

If you are in a location with fluorescent lighting, activate the Advanced button which opens a dialog box where you can select the lighting correction for the flickering of fluorescent light. When finished, select OK or Cancel to return to the main Camera and Scanner Recognition dialog box.

To acquire an image from a scanner, place the page on the scanner bed then press INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, A to open the Camera and Scanner Recognition dialog box. Make sure your scanner is selected in the Cameras and Scanners combo box and then choose the Acquire button to begin the recognition process. Just like when acquiring images from the PEARL, JAWS will also announce the orientation of the page. Once recognition is complete, JAWS displays the text in the Results Viewer where you can use standard reading commands to review the text or select and copy it to other applications. If your scanner includes an auto document feeder, select the Use auto-document feed, if available check box to scan and recognize multiple pages.

Activate the Advance button to open a dialog box where you can configure additional scanner settings including interrupting the current scan when canceling recognition, adjusting the contrast based on brightness instead of threshold, and closing TWAIN after each scan. Note that not all scanners may support these options. When finished, select OK or Cancel to return to the main Camera and Scanner Recognition dialog box.

Note: When capturing multiple images from a camera or scanner, the OCR process takes longer for large batches of pages. As text is recognized, it is added to the end of the existing text already in the Results Viewer. This allows you to continue reading without interruption as the document is processed. If you are currently not reading using Say All, JAWS announces the current line as new text is added to the Results Viewer to indicate that OCR is still in progress.

Recognizing Image Files

JAWS can recognize text in image files saved as BMP, JPG, JPEG, GIF, TIF, TIFF, PNG, PCX, or PDF. To recognize a file, press INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, F while focused on the specific file in File Explorer or on the Desktop. The recognized text will be displayed in the results viewer where you can use standard reading commands to review the text or select and copy it to other applications. Alternatively, press the APPLICATIONS key to open the context menu and choose "Recognize File with JAWS," or "Recognize File with Fusion" if Fusion is running.

Note: If JAWS is not able to perform OCR on a PDF due to its security settings, try opening the PDF in Adobe Reader and then use the INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, D command to recognize PDF documents.

Recognizing an Open PDF Document

If you open a PDF in Adobe Reader which turns out to be inaccessible, press INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, D to have JAWS begin recognizing the entire document. After several seconds, the contents of the PDF file are displayed in the Results Viewer where you can use standard reading commands to review the text or select and copy it to other applications.

Note: The OCR process takes longer for larger PDF files. As text is recognized, it is added to the end of the existing text already in the Results Viewer. This allows you to continue reading without interruption as the document is processed. If you are currently not reading using Say All, JAWS announces the current line as new text is added to the Results Viewer to indicate that OCR is still in progress.

Note: If the PDF document requires a password, you will be prompted to enter it when you first press INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, D. You must enter the correct password before the OCR process will continue.

Recognizing Images on the Screen

Sometimes, you will encounter application screens or controls that are only images of text. When this occurs, you can press INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, W to recognize the current application window, INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, S to recognize the entire screen, or INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, C to recognize the current control. JAWS will quickly recognize the image and activate the JAWS cursor so you can navigate the resulting text. The recognized text will be in the same location as the actual image on the screen. In order to differentiate the recognized text from other text that may be in the window, JAWS will use a different voice when it encounters the recognized text. When you activate the PC Cursor, or switch to another application or dialog box, the text is removed and you will need to perform the OCR again.

For example, if you are trying to install an application and the setup process does not appear to have any readily available text when pressing TAB or using the JAWS Cursor, you can try Convenient OCR. Start with the PC Cursor and press INSERT+SPACEBAR, O, W to recognize the text of the welcome screen graphic. You can then use the JAWS Cursor and NUM PAD SLASH (left mouse button) to move to and choose what are possible buttons and links.

If you are not getting clear recognition results or you find that text is running together when you recognize the current screen, window, or control, refer to FAQ 63556 for ways to optimize performance. When recognizing a PDF document or other image files, Convenient OCR does not use the physical image that is currently visible on the screen, so the recognition results feature a higher degree of accuracy since they are not affected by the current screen resolution.

See also:

Picture Smart

 

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       | Next                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Picture Smart

Picture Smart allows you to choose a photo and submit it to be analyzed. A description of the image is then displayed in the JAWS Results Viewer window. Descriptions might include details such as the number of people in the photo, recognizable landmarks, landscape details such as "outdoors with a blue sky and green grass," if there are vehicles such as automobiles or trains, and more. If there is text in the picture, it will OCR the text and provide that as well.

To use Picture Smart, use the layered command INSERT+SPACEBAR followed by P. Once the Picture Smart layer is active, the following keystrokes are available:

·         A - Opens the Picture Smart dialog box where you can acquire an image from a flatbed scanner or the Freedom Scientific PEARL camera and submit it to be described.

·         F - Describes the currently selected image in File Explorer. Supported images include BMP, JPEG, GIF, TIF, or PNG.

·         C - Describes an image associated with the current control. For instance, a graphic on a web page or in an email message.

·         B - Describes the contents of the Windows Clipboard if it contains an image.

·         QUESTION MARK - Displays help for the Picture Smart layer.

There is also a PictureSmart folder where you can save an image and have it automatically submitted for analyzing and display the resulting description. To access this folder, press WINDOWS Key+E to open File Explorer, open the Pictures folder, and then open the PictureSmart folder.

To use Picture Smart, the "submit annonymous usage data" option must be enabled in Settings Center. This sends encrypted information to Freedom Scientific. The images from Picture Smart are then submitted to the various services (such as Microsoft and Google) which analyze the images and returns the descriptions back to JAWS. These descriptions are then displayed in the Results Viewer. If you attempt to use Picture Smart and this setting is off, a message displays prompting you to turn it on.

Note: Picture Smart is currently only available while in the English Language UI of JAWS and Fusion as the services that perform the image analysis do not currently support international languages for descriptions of images. For users of localized versions of JAWS running in versions of Windows other than English, you must switch the JAWS UI language to English to try out this feature. We plan to make Picture Smart available in more languages in the future as these services continue to expand to include additional languages.

See also:

Convenient OCR

 

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       | Next                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Research It 

For a quick overview, see Research It On the Fly, or continue reading the following introduction.

Research It is a versatile tool that provides quick access to data while also making it easy to return to your primary task. It uses what is known as a lookup source and the Results Viewer to find information, whether it is the meaning of a word, top news stories, directions to and information about a local business, and more. Using just a few keystrokes, you can launch Research It from any application on your computer. The following describes keystrokes, available lookup sources, and various ways to launch and use Research It.

·         Keystrokes

·         Lookup Sources

·         Examples Showing How to Use Research It

·         Changing the Default Lookup Source

·         Removing or Adding a Lookup Source

·         Troubleshooting

Research It On the Fly

To quickly lookup an item of interest using Research It, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+SPACEBAR, R.
 The Research It dialog box appears with focus in the Word or Phrase edit combo box.

2.    Do one of the following:

·         Type a word, phrase, date, tracking number, or other item into the edit combo box, press TAB, and then select a lookup source from the list.

·         Select an item from the edit combo box history list, press TAB, and then select a lookup source from the list.

·         Press TAB to jump directly to the Lookup Source list, and then select a lookup source. (This option is useful when using a news lookup source.)

3.    Press ENTER.
 After a few seconds, the JAWS Results Viewer window opens and displays the search results. 
 
 Note:  For specific examples describing how to enter search parameters, refer to Research It Examples.

Keystrokes

The following briefly describes the available Research It keystrokes. Note that if JAWS is configured for Laptop Layout mode, substitute CAPS LOCK for the INSERT key.

·         INSERT+SPACEBAR, R: Opens the Research It dialog box, where you can then type a word or expression of interest, and then select a lookup source to perform your search. This can be a US ZIP code, or city and state, or company name that can be used with the Business lookup tool to find a business, or a word to use with the Wikipedia search query to view its meaning or description. This convenient, layered keystroke provides the most efficient way to search for a term. Note: When using this keystroke, press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, and then press R.

·         INSERT+WINDOWS Key+R: Launches Research It and uses the primary lookup source to directly show results in the Results Viewer. This keystroke bypasses the Research It dialog box.
 
 By default, Wiktionary is the primary lookup source. This means that while the cursor is on a word in a document or Web page, you can press this keystroke and quickly lookup the Wiktionary description for that word. You can always change the primary lookup source at any time using the Options button or the JAWS Settings Center, which lets you select which lookup source to use as the default. For example, if your job requires that you frequently lookup USPS tracking numbers, then the USPS Tracking lookup source would be a good candidate for your primary lookup source. As you become more familiar with Research It, and as more lookup modules are created and made available to you, you will want to change the default lookup source used by JAWS, or just use a different lookup source on the fly.

·         INSERT+CTRL+WINDOWS Key+R: Functions the same as the INSERT+SPACEBAR, R keystroke.

·         INSERT+F2, R: Opens Research It from the Run JAWS Manager dialog box. It provides another way for you to select a lookup source for the word at the current cursor location. Note that this is temporary and does not change your default settings. JAWS will continue to use the primary lookup source the next time you run Research It.

·         ESC: Closes the Results Viewer window and returns to your original focus point.

Lookup Sources

JAWS comes with the following lookup sources.

·         Wiktionary: Provides a dictionary description of the word at the current cursor location in a document or Web page. You can also use the edit combo box to type a word to lookup. Wiktionary is the primary lookup source. Refer to the Wiktionary example for more information.

·         Wikipedia: Provides encyclopedia results for the word at the current cursor location in a document or Web page. You can also use the edit combo box to type a word to lookup. See the Wikipedia example for more information.

·         BBC Top News Stories: Displays a link and a synopsis of news stories as reported by the BBC. Select the link to read the complete story. See the News Stories example to help you configure the news search.

·         CNN Headline News: Displays a link and a synopsis of news stories as reported by CNN Headline News. Select the link to read the complete story. To use this lookup source, leave the edit combo box blank, and then select it from the list.

·         Fox News Stories: Displays a link and a synopsis of news stories as reported by Fox News. Select the link to read the complete story. To use this lookup source, leave the edit combo box blank, and then select it from the list.

·         Reuters Top News Stories: Displays a synopsis of the top news stories as reported by Reuters news agency. A link for the complete story is also available. To use this lookup source, leave the edit combo box blank, and then select it from the list.

·         Technology News from CNET: Displays a link and a synopsis of the latest headlines from CNET news. Select the link to read the complete story. To use this lookup source, leave the edit combo box blank, and then select it from the list.

·         Business Search: Allows you to search for a specific or general business in your area using its name or business category and location. The location can be in the form of a US ZIP code, city, or city and state. Search results will provide the name, address, phone number, and, when applicable, Web site link. Always use a semicolon to separate the business name or category from the location, for example, pizza; 33716. This particular search will return a list of pizza restaurants in and around the 33716 ZIP code. If you know the name and location of a business, such as John Doe Plumbing in St. Petersburg, Florida, you can type john doe plumbing; st petersburg, florida to retrieve the address and phone number. If you would rather see results for more plumbers in your city, enter the term plumbers and then the location for a list of these businesses in your area. Note: Use a comma to separate the city and state location. Also, do not use a period when typing city name abbreviations, for example, type St Petersburg, or Washington, DC. For more information, refer to the Business Search example.

·         USPS Tracking: Returns progress and delivery status information for a valid USPS tracking number. Type the number in the edit combo box, and select this lookup source.

·         Bookshare™ Book Search: Displays search results from Bookshare.org based on an author’s name, a book’s ISBN number, or words found in a book title or book description. If a match is found, the result appears as a link containing the author, title, and copyright date.

·         Area Code Lookup: Type a U.S. or Canadian area code into the edit combo box to learn the city, state, or province location for that area code.

·         Time Search: Displays the current time and time zone for any location typed into the edit field. Note: Be specific when entering a location since one name may represent multiple cities. For example, if you only type London into the edit combo box, you will receive time results for London, England, U.K., London, Ontario, Canada, and London, Arkansas, U.S.A. If no result is returned, enter another city that is close to the preferred location.

·         Stock Quotes: Displays current and up to 52-week historical financial information for the stock symbol entered in the edit field or selected from a document, spreadsheet, or Web page. To do this, type the stock symbol in the edit combo box, and select this lookup source.

·         Convert Currency: Use this lookup source to convert an amount of money from one currency into a foreign equivalent. The current day’s exchange rate is used to convert the currency values typed into the lookup edit field. Note: Three letter abbreviations are used to represent international currencies, for example, USD for U.S. dollars, GBP for British pounds, or EUR for Euros. To view a list of valid currency abbreviations, select the Convert Currency lookup without entering a monetary value. Research It will indicate that you must enter valid currency values and will then display a list of currency abbreviations for numerous countries. Run Convert Currency again, but this time use the appropriate currency abbreviations from the previous list. When typing currencies and amounts into the lookup edit field, first type the amount and currency you are converting from, and then type the currency that you are converting to. For example, to convert 100 U.S. dollars into British pounds, type 100 USD GBP using a space between each item typed. The result will appear similar to 100 U.S. dollars = 61. 2070021 British pounds. Refer to the Convert Currency example for more information.

·         Flight Info Lookup: Provides recent or current flight status when you type an airline abbreviation followed by a valid flight number in the edit combo box. Two letter abbreviations are used to identify an airline. A list of abbreviations will appear in the Results Viewer if you enter an invalid airline code, an invalid flight number, or no information in the edit combo box. Text typed in the edit combo box is not case-sensitive and can be entered with or without a space between the airline abbreviation and flight number.

If you are a software developer or script developer, you can create and customize your own lookup module and tailor it to your organization's needs. A law or medical office can have a search engine for legal and medical terms, while a school or government agency can have a lookup module dedicated to specific acronyms and terminology. Visit the JAWS Documentation Web page to download a developer's guide that outlines formatting for rule sets and debugging techniques.

Research It Examples

There are several ways to run Research It. You can use the default lookup source, or you can select a lookup source from the Research It list. The following examples show different ways to search for specific information. For other ideas and ways to use Research It, listen to the August 2009 FSCast for a demonstration.

Wiktionary

Imagine that you are reading a document online and you come across an unfamiliar word. With Wiktionary set as your primary lookup source, you can do the following:

1.    While the cursor is on that word, press INSERT+WINDOWS Key+R to launch Research It.
 
 After a few seconds, the JAWS Results Viewer window opens and displays a Wiktionary-based description of the word.  With the Results Viewer open, you can also select and copy the information to the Windows clipboard.

2.    After reading the description, press ESC to close the Results Viewer, and JAWS returns to the cursor location in your document.

Wikipedia

You can use Wikipedia to quickly research an item.

1.    Press INSERT+SPACEBAR, R.

2.    In the edit combo box, type the term that you want to find, and then press TAB. For example, type:
 
  Freedom Scientific, and press TAB.
 

3.    Use the UP and DOWN ARROWS or first letter navigation to select Wikipedia, and press ENTER.

4.    After a few seconds, the Results Viewer window opens and displays the results returned from the Wikipedia lookup. Press ESC to close the Results Viewer.

News Stories

For a summary of current news stories, you can use the following procedure for the BBC, CNN, Fox News, Reuters, and Technology News for CNET lookup sources.

1.    Press INSERT+SPACEBAR, R, and then press TAB to move focus to the Lookup Source list.

2.    Select a news lookup source from the list, and press ENTER.

3.    After a few seconds, the Results Viewer window opens and displays a synopsis of news stories using the selected lookup source. If you want more information about a specific story, select its Full Article link. This action closes the Results Viewer window and then displays the complete story in a Web browser. Otherwise, press ESC to close the Results Viewer.

Business Search 

Use the Business Search lookup source to find a specific or general business in your area. Search results will provide the name, address, and phone number.

1.    Press INSERT+SPACEBAR, R.

2.    Type a business name or business category, followed by a semicolon, and then a US ZIP code, city, or city and state for the location. Next, press TAB. For example, type:
 
 grocery store; 33716 and then press TAB
 (These parameters will generate a list of grocery stores in and around the 33716 ZIP code after you select the Business Search lookup source.)
 
 italian restaurants; st petersburg, florida and then press TAB
 (These parameters will generate a list of Italian restaurants in St. Petersburg, Florida after you select the Business Search lookup source.)
 
 Note: Always use a semicolon to separate the business name or business category from the location. Use a comma to separate the city and state location. Do not use a period when typing city name abbreviations, for example, type St Petersburg, FL, or Washington, DC.
 
 

3.    Use the UP and DOWN ARROWS or first letter navigation to select Business Search, and press ENTER.

4.    After a few seconds, the Results Viewer window opens and displays your search results.

Convert Currency  

Use the Convert Currency lookup source to quickly convert an amount of money from one currency to another currency. The lookup source uses three-character abbreviations to represent international currencies. The conversion that appears is based on the day’s current conversion rate.

1.    Press INSERT+SPACEBAR, R.

2.    Type the amount of money and currency that you want to convert from followed by the currency that you want to convert to, and then press TAB. For example, to convert 100 U.S. dollars into Euros, type:
 
 100 USD EUR and then press TAB.
 
 Note: Make sure to include a space between each item. Always use the currency’s three-character abbreviation. Select currency abbreviations for a list of currencies.

3.    Use the UP and DOWN ARROWS or first letter navigation to select Convert Currency and then press ENTER.

4.    After a few seconds, the Results Viewer window opens and displays the conversion results, for example:
 
 100 U.S. dollars = 67.4399784 Euros
 
 If you did not type a valid currency, Research It will display the currency abbreviations so that you can try again.

Changing the Default Lookup Source 

The fastest way to change the default lookup source is through the Research It dialog box as described in the following steps. Note that the default can also be set using the Settings Center.

1.    Press INSERT+SPACEBAR, R. The Research It dialog box opens.

2.    Press TAB to move to the Options button, and then press ENTER. The Research It Options dialog box opens.

3.    Press the UP or DOWN ARROWS to select a lookup source, and then press TAB to move to the Set Primary button.

4.    Press SPACEBAR to make the selected item the primary lookup source, and then choose OK to save changes and close the Research It Options dialog box.

Note: After setting a default lookup source, you can use INSERT+WINDOWS Key+R, which bypasses the Research It dialog box and automatically launches the Results Viewer using the new default. You can also continue to use INSERT+SPACEBAR, R to run Research It.

Using Settings Center

To assign a default lookup source using Settings Center, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+F2, and select Settings Center.

2.    Press CTRL+SHIFT+D to load the JAWS default settings.

3.    Press TAB to move to the tree view, and then select and open the Research It group.

4.    Press SPACEBAR to choose the Configure Lookup button. The Research It Options dialog box opens.

5.    Press the UP or DOWN ARROWS to select a lookup source, and then press TAB to move to the Set Primary button.

6.    Press SPACEBAR to make the selected item the primary lookup source.

7.    Choose OK to save changes and close the Research It Options dialog box.

8.    Choose OK to save changes and close Settings Center.

Select Research It Options Dialog for more information about this dialog box.

Removing or Adding a Lookup Source

To remove or add an item to the Lookup Source list, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+SPACEBAR, R. The Research It dialog box opens.

2.    Press TAB to move to the Options button, and then press SPACEBAR. The Research It Options dialog box opens.

3.    Press UP or DOWN ARROWS to select a lookup source, and then do one of the following:

·         To remove a lookup source from the list, press SPACEBAR to clear the check box.

·         To add a lookup source to the list, press SPACEBAR to select the check box.

4.    Press TAB to move to the OK button and then press ENTER.
 
 Note: When you update your copy of JAWS, all lookup sources are restored and appear in the list box.

Troubleshooting

If you have trouble running Research It, and your computer uses a proxy server to connect to the Internet, try the following:

1.    While JAWS is running, open Internet Explorer.

2.    Press ALT+T to open the Tools menu and then select Internet Options.

3.    Press CTRL+TAB to navigate to and open the Advanced page.

4.    Press H to navigate to the HTTP 1.1 Settings, and then select both Use HTTP 1.1 through proxy connections and Use HTTP 1.1.

5.    Choose OK.

6.    Restart JAWS.

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       | Next                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Speech History

By default, JAWS retains a list of the last 50 announcements that were spoken by the speech synthesizer. For users of refreshable braille displays, JAWS has always provided a mode where you could review this spoken information in braille. When this mode is active, you can use the controls on the braille display to review the last 50 announcements that have been spoken by JAWS.

Speech History extends this functionality to users who rely on using speech more than braille. If you miss one or more messages spoken by JAWS, you can press INSERT+SPACEBAR, followed by H to open a Results Viewer window containing up to the last 50 announcements spoken by the synthesizer. When the Speech History window opens, you are placed on the line containing the most recent announcement.

To clear the history, press INSERT+SPACEBAR, followed by SHIFT+H. The history is also cleared when you lock the computer or completely log off.

If you do not want JAWS to keep a history of what is spoken, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+F2, and select Settings Center.

2.    Press CTRL+SHIFT+D to load the default JAWS settings.

3.    In the Search edit box, type "speech history" without the quotes.

4.    Press DOWN ARROW to move to Enable Speech History in the filtered search results in the tree view.

5.    Press SPACEBAR to clear this check box.

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       | Next Section          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

 

Keyboard Commands

JAWS has an extensive list of keyboard commands. Keyboard key combinations (called keystrokes or commands) provide quick and effective access to the entire scope of Windows features. Programs are opened, used, and closed. Letters are written and edited. Spreadsheets are compiled and calculated. Files are created, modified, and deleted. The Internet is browsed, and files and programs are downloaded. Through extensive use of keystrokes, the limitations of a graphical user environment are overcome.

JAWS uses cursors to track system activity and speak the necessary information. JAWS keystrokes allow you to control what information - and how much of it - JAWS speaks at any given time by controlling the movement of these cursors. Most of the time when you use a keystroke, you are also manipulating a cursor. For this reason, many keystrokes behave differently for different cursors. In fact, some keystrokes do not work at all unless the correct cursor is selected. For example, if you try to restrict the JAWS cursor (INSERT+R) while the PC Cursor is active, you receive the message, "Before you can set restriction, you must turn on either the JAWS or Invisible Cursor."

Some cursors only work in certain applications, or sections of them. The PC cursor cannot directly access every portion of the screen as it only goes where the system focus goes. The Virtual PC Cursor works in HTML-based applications such as Internet Explorer, Firefox, Outlook, as well as PDF files in Adobe Reader.

This section of the JAWS help system contains listings of commonly used Windows keystrokes and listings of all JAWS keystrokes. We have attempted to organize these keystrokes according to what they do so you can easily find the keystrokes you need at any given time.

Find the keystrokes you need in each of the following areas:

JAWS Keystrokes

Standard Windows Keystrokes

JAWS Keystrokes for Popular Applications

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

JAWS Keystrokes

JAWS provides many keyboard key combinations (keystrokes) to enable you to better navigate Windows and use Windows based programs. This section contains keystrokes that are specific to JAWS.

If you have used JAWS for some time, you are familiar with using the INSERT key as part of the commands you type. We refer to this key as the "modifier" key, or the "JAWS" key. The INSERT key is the default JAWS Key in the desktop keyboard layout. The CAPS LOCK key is now the default JAWS key in the laptop keyboard layout. And you can now assign your own JAWS key. For more information, please refer to the JAWS Key.

This section documents commands by listing them with the default JAWS keys for the desktop and laptop keyboard layouts. Those commands listed in the desktop keystrokes sections that are not also listed in the laptop keystrokes section should work with the INSERT or the CAPS LOCK key if you are using the laptop keyboard layout.

You will find listings of keystrokes for the following areas:

JAWS Keystrokes for Reading Text

Change Voice Rate on the Fly

Navigation - Information Keystrokes

JAWS Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

Keystrokes for Working in Tables

JAWS Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation

Miscellaneous JAWS Keystrokes

Keystrokes for Accessing the JAWS Utilities

JAWS Keystrokes for Accessing Help

Laptop Keystrokes

Built-in Search Engine for JAWS Keystrokes

JAWS provides many keystrokes to perform a variety of commands. Many commands can be performed anywhere in Windows, such as reading the window title or current line, while other commands are only available in specific applications like Microsoft Word or Internet Explorer. If you are using JAWS with a refreshable braille display, there are even JAWS commands that can be performed using the controls on the braille display.

While there are certain commands that are used by the majority of JAWS users on a daily basis, such as reading the current line (INSERT+UP ARROW) or reading the current window title (INSERT+T), there are numerous commands that even the most experienced users do not use regularly and need to be looked up. Certain types of commands can be especially difficult to remember as some of them require pressing several keys at once. The JAWS Command Search feature enables you to enter a full or partial description of a command whose keystroke you do not remember. JAWS will display all commands that match your search criteria, the description of the feature, and all the associated keystrokes, including braille commands if a refreshable braille display is currently connected.

For example, you may need to locate a keystroke for working with formulas in Excel. Instead of opening the JAWS help topic for Excel and searching through all of the available keystrokes, or starting Keyboard Help (INSERT+1) and pressing various keystroke combinations until you find the correct one, you can open the Search for JAWS Commands window while focused in Excel, type "formulas" in the search edit box, and then view a list of all keystrokes related to working with formulas. Similarly, if you are browsing the Web and you need to find the keystroke for displaying a list of headings on the current page (INSERT+F6), you can open the Search for JAWS Commands window from Internet Explorer or Firefox, type "list headings" in the search edit box, and this command will be the first result.

To search for a command, press INSERT+SPACEBAR, followed by J, to open the Search for JAWS Commands window. Alternatively, you can choose Search for Commands from the Run JAWS Manager dialog box (INSERT+F2) or the JAWS Utilities menu. An HTML window opens and places you in an edit field. If Forms Mode is set to Auto or Semi-Auto, Forms Mode will be activated when the edit field gains focus. Begin typing the description of the command you are looking for and the results area in the lower part of the window will automatically update. As you type, the first result in the list will be spoken automatically. After you finish typing the command, press TAB to move into the list of results.

Note: If Auto Forms Mode is set to Manual, you will need to first press ENTER to activate Forms Mode before you begin typing in the edit field.

Since this is an HTML window, you can use standard reading commands to review the search results. Each command name along with the first keystroke is displayed as a heading so you can quickly move between results using the H and SHIFT+H Navigation Quick Keys. When you locate the command you want, press DOWN ARROW to move to a brief description of what the command does, and any additional keystrokes that can be used to perform the command. This will include non-layered, layered, and braille keystrokes. If a particular command offers a braille keystroke, but a braille display is not currently connected when you performed the search, the braille keystroke will not be listed.

Each JAWS command name and its associated keystrokes are also displayed as links. This allows you to press ENTER on the command name heading, or any of the associated keystroke links to close the Search for JAWS Commands window and activate the command. You can also exit this window by pressing ALT+F4, or the ESC key.

Note: When performing a JAWS command search, the search results will only contain JAWS keystrokes. Microsoft Windows keystrokes, such as CTRL+A for select all, are not included in the search results.

See also:

Standard Windows Keystrokes

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

JAWS Keystrokes for Reading Text

+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Description                                                                                                 | Command                                                                                                          |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Character                                                                                         | LEFT ARROW                                                                                                       |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Character                                                                                          | RIGHT ARROW                                                                                                      |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Character                                                                                               | NUM PAD 5                                                                                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Character Phonetically                                                                                  | NUM PAD 5 twice quickly                                                                                          |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Word                                                                                              | INSERT+LEFT ARROW                                                                                                |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Word                                                                                               | INSERT+RIGHT ARROW                                                                                               |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Word                                                                                                    | INSERT+NUM PAD 5                                                                                                 |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Spell Word                                                                                                  | INSERT+NUM PAD 5 twice quickly                                                                                   |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Line                                                                                              | UP ARROW                                                                                                         |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Line                                                                                               | DOWN ARROW                                                                                                       |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Current Line                                                                                            | INSERT+UP ARROW                                                                                                  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Spell Current Line                                                                                          | INSERT+UP ARROW twice quickly                                                                                    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Sentence (available in Word, WordPerfect, Outlook messages, or when the Virtual Cursor is active) | ALT+UP ARROW                                                                                                     |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Sentence (available in Word, WordPerfect, Outlook messages, or when the Virtual Cursor is active)  | ALT+DOWN ARROW                                                                                                   |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Current Sentence                                                                                        | ALT+NUM PAD 5                                                                                                    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say to Cursor                                                                                               | INSERT+HOME                                                                                                      |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say from Cursor                                                                                             | INSERT+PAGE UP                                                                                                   |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Spell to Cursor                                                                                             | INSERT+HOME twice quickly                                                                                        |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Spell from Cursor                                                                                           | INSERT+PAGE UP twice quickly                                                                                     |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say All                                                                                                     | INSERT+DOWN ARROW                                                                                                |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Fast Forward during a Say All                                                                               | RIGHT ARROW                                                                                                      |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Rewind during a Say All                                                                                     | LEFT ARROW                                                                                                       |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Toggle Full Speech, Speech On Demand (default), or Mute Speech                                              | INSERT+SPACEBAR, S                                                                                               |
|                                                                                                             |  Note: When using this keystroke, press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, and then press S to change the speech mode. |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Toggle Speech On Demand or Mute Speech (Full Speech must be disabled)                                       | INSERT+SPACEBAR, SHIFT+S                                                                                         |
|                                                                                                             |  Note: When using this keystroke, press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, and then press SHIFT+S to mute speech.      |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Color                                                                                                   | INSERT+5                                                                                                         |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say ASCII or Hexadecimal Value                                                                              | NUM PAD 5 three times quickly                                                                                    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Font                                                                                                    | INSERT+F, twice quickly to display in virtual viewer                                                             |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Start Skim Reading                                                                                          | CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW                                                                                           |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Skim Reading dialog box                                                                                     | CTRL+INSERT+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW                                                                                     |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Copy Selected Text to FSClipboard                                                                           | INSERT+WINDOWS Key+C                                                                                             |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Additional Notes

See also:
 Keystrokes for Using the Clipboard
 Windows Keystrokes for Working with Text

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Change Voice Rate on the Fly

JAWS allows you to temporarily or permanently change the speech rate for the current voice. This can be done at any time - even while using Say All!

When permanently changing the speech rate, the new rate is saved to the active voice profile. During a Say All, changing the speech rate is only temporary.

When not using SayAll:

  --------------------------------- --------------------------------
  Description                       Command
  Temporarily Decrease Voice Rate   ALT+CTRL+PAGE DOWN
  Temporarily Increase Voice Rate   ALT+CTRL+PAGE UP
  Permanently Decrease Voice Rate   ALT+WINDOWS Key+CTRL+PAGE DOWN
  Permanently Increase Voice Rate   ALT+WINDOWS Key+CTRL+PAGE UP
  --------------------------------- --------------------------------

Note: JAWS states "slower" or "faster" with each press of the above keystrokes.

During a SayAll:

  --------------------- -----------
  Description           Command
  Decrease Voice Rate   PAGE DOWN
  Increase Voice Rate   PAGE UP
  --------------------- -----------

To restore the speech rate to the last saved setting if changed temporarily or during a Say All, press INSERT+ESC. Switching to another application using ALT+TAB also restores the default voice rate if changed temporarily.

When using these commands to temporarily or permanently increase or decrease the speech rate on-the-fly, only the rate for the primary language in use in the currently active voice profile is affected. For example, if the primary language is English, the speech rate for all available English voices will be changed. All other languages in the profile will continue to use the rate that you configured in the Voice Adjustment dialog box.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Navigational & Informational Keystrokes

  ---------------------------- ---------------------------------------
  Description                  Command
  Say System Time              INSERT+F12
  Say System Date              INSERT+F12 twice quickly
  Say Window Title             INSERT+T
  Say Window Prompt and Text   INSERT+TAB
  Say Top Line of Window       INSERT+END
  Say Bottom Line of Window    INSERT+PAGE DOWN
  Say Selected Text            INSERT+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW
  Spell Selected Text          INSERT+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW twice quickly
  Say Application Version      CTRL+INSERT+V
  Window List                  INSERT+F10
  List System Tray Icons       INSERT+F11
  View System Tray Contents    CTRL+SHIFT+F11
  List Labeled Graphics        CTRL+INSERT+SHIFT+G
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------------------

Additional Notes

See Also:

General Windows Keystrokes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

JAWS Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

  ------------------------------------- -----------------------------
  Description                           Command
  Say Default Button of Dialog          INSERT+E
  Say Current Control Hot Key           SHIFT+NUM PAD 5
  Read Current Window                   INSERT+B
  Say Window Prompt in Text             INSERT+TAB
  Read Word in Context                  INSERT+C
  Open Combo Box                        ALT+DOWN ARROW
  Close Combo Box                       ALT+UP ARROW
  Select Multiple List Items            CTRL+SHIFT or CTRL+SPACEBAR
  Unselect All But Current              CTRL+\
  Read List View Columns 1 through 10   CTRL+INSERT+1 through 0
  ------------------------------------- -----------------------------

Tip: Press INSERT+F1 in any control in a dialog box for context sensitive help on the type of control and keystrokes that work in that control.

Additional Notes

See Also: Windows Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

JAWS Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation

  ------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Description                                 Command
  PC Cursor                                   NUM PAD PLUS (press twice quickly if the Touch Cursor is currently active)
  JAWS Cursor                                 NUM PAD MINUS
  Invisible Cursor                            NUM PAD MINUS twice quickly
  Touch Cursor                                SHIFT+NUM PAD PLUS
  Route Touch Cursor to Focus Location        INSERT+NUM PAD PLUS
  Route PC Cursor to JAWS Cursor              INSERT+NUM PAD PLUS
  Route JAWS Cursor to PC Cursor              INSERT+NUM PAD MINUS
  Tether JAWS to PC                           CTRL+INSERT+NUM PAD MINUS
  Restrict JAWS Cursor or Virtual PC Cursor   INSERT+R
  Left Mouse Button                           NUM PAD SLASH
  Right Mouse Button                          NUM PAD STAR
  Left Mouse Button Lock                      INSERT+NUM PAD SLASH
  Right Mouse Button Lock                     INSERT+NUM PAD STAR
  Drag and Drop                               CTRL+INSERT+NUM PAD SLASH
  Say Active Cursor                           ALT+DELETE
  Say Cursor Type                             CTRL+INSERT+SHIFT+C
  Mouse Down                                  ALT+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW (when the JAWS Cursor is active)
  Mouse Left                                  ALT+SHIFT+LEFT ARROW (when the JAWS Cursor is active)
  Mouse Right                                 ALT+SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW (when the JAWS Cursor is active)
  Mouse Up                                    ALT+SHIFT+UP ARROW (when the JAWS Cursor is active)
  ------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Additional Notes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Miscellaneous JAWS Keystrokes

+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Description                                                 | Command                                               |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Quick Settings                                              | INSERT+V                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Select a Voice Profile                                      | INSERT+CTRL+S                                         |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Language                                             | CTRL+WINDOWS Key+L                                    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Interrupt Speech                                            | CTRL                                                  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Audio Ducking Toggle                                        | INSERT+SPACEBAR, D                                    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Screen Shade Toggle                                         | INSERT+SPACEBAR, F11 or INSERT+SPACEBAR, PRINTSCREEN  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Custom Highlight Assign                                     | INSERT+CTRL+H                                         |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Refresh Screen and Unmute Current Sound Device              | INSERT+ESC                                            |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Screen Echo Toggle                                          | INSERT+S                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Typing Echo Toggle                                          | INSERT+2                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Pass Key Through                                            | INSERT+3                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Symbol to Print                                      | INSERT+4                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| JAWS Window                                                 | INSERT+J                                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| JAWS Find                                                   | INSERT+CTRL+F                                         |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| JAWS Find Next                                              | INSERT+F3                                             |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| JAWS Find Previous                                          | INSERT+SHIFT+F3                                       |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Shut Down JAWS                                              | INSERT+F4                                             |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Keyboard Lock                                               | INSERT+SPACEBAR, L                                    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Active Configuration Name                               | INSERT+Q, twice quickly to display in virtual viewer. |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Run JAWS Manager                                            | INSERT+F2                                             |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Open Word Index                                             | INSERT+CTRL+W                                         |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Open Skim Read Summary                                      | INSERT+WINDOWS Key+W                                  |
|  (Based on the last word selected from the Word Index list) |                                                       |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Virtualize Window                                           | INSERT+ALT+W                                          |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| View Speech History                                         | INSERT+SPACEBAR, H                                    |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Clear Speech History                                        | INSERT+SPACEBAR, SHIFT+H                              |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Select Scheme                                               | INSERT+ALT+S                                          |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Minimize All Applications                                   | WINDOWS Key+M                                         |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Copy Selected Text to FSClipboard                           | INSERT+WINDOWS Key+C                                  |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Script Utility Mode Toggle                                  | INSERT+WINDOWS Key+NUM PAD MINUS (Desktop layout)     |
|                                                             |  CAPS LOCK+WINDOWS Key+DASH (Laptop layout)           |
+-------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

Additional Notes

See also:

General Windows Application Keystrokes

General Windows Keystrokes

Navigation - Information Keystrokes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Accessing the JAWS Utilities

  --------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------
  Description                       Command
  JAWS Command Search               INSERT+SPACEBAR, J or INSERT+F2, and then select Commands Search
  Create a Prompt                   CTRL+INSERT+TAB or INSERT+F2, and then select Prompt Create
  Graphics Labeler                  INSERT+G or INSERT+F2, and then select Graphics Labeler
  Start Auto Graphics Labeler       CTRL+INSERT+G
  Set Frame Top Left                CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT BRACKET
  Set Frame Bottom Right            CTRL+SHIFT+RIGHT BRACKET
  Set Frame to Window               CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT BRACKET twice quickly
  Clear Initial Values              CTRL+INSERT+C
  Run JAWS Manager                  INSERT+F2
  Settings Center                   INSERT+6 or INSERT+F2, and then select Settings Center
  Dictionary Manager                INSERT+D or INSERT+F2, and then select Dictionary Manager
  Frame Viewer                      INSERT+9 or INSERT+F2, and then select Frame Viewer
  Keyboard Manager                  INSERT+8 or INSERT+F2, and then select Keyboard Manager
  Script Manager                    INSERT+0 or INSERT+F2, and then select Script Manager
  Window Class Reassign             INSERT+7 or INSERT+F2, and then select Window Class Reassign
  Screen Sensitive Help Technical   CTRL+INSERT+F1
  Say Special Window Classes        CTRL+INSERT+F2
  Say Frame at Cursor               INSERT+X
  --------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------

Additional Notes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Table Layer Keystrokes

Table layer keystrokes offer a fast and convenient way to navigate tables. The table layer eliminates the need to have to hold down several keys at once to perform a table navigation command.

Below is a list of the layered keystrokes for table navigation. Press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, followed by T to get to the table layer. Then press any of the following keystrokes.

·         List the keystrokes you can use in this layer, QUESTION MARK

·         Move to cell above, below, left, or right, ARROW Key in any direction

·         Say current cell, NUMPAD 5

·         Move to the beginning of the current row, HOME

·         Move to the end of the current row, END

·         Jump to the first cell in a table, CTRL+HOME

·         Jump to the last cell in a table, CTRL+END

·         Move to the beginning of the current column, CONTROL+UP ARROW

·         Move to the bottom of the current column, CONTROL+DOWN ARROW

·         Move to the beginning of the current row, CONTROL+LEFT ARROW

·         Move to end of current row, CONTROL+RIGHT ARROW

·         Jump to next table, CONTROL+ENTER

·         Jump to prior table, CONTROL+SHIFT+ENTER

·         Read the current row, SHIFT+UP ARROW

·         Read from the current cell, SHIFT+PAGE UP

·         Read to the current cell, SHIFT+HOME

·         Read the current column, SHIFT+NUMPAD 5

·         Read to the bottom of the column, SHIFT+PAGE DOWN

·         Read from the top of the column, SHIFT+END

The Table Layer remains active until you press a key that does not perform a table command, such as ESC, SPACEBAR, TAB, or ENTER.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Working in Tables

JAWS now supports standard commands for working in tables. These commands work in most popular applications, allowing you access right away - without having to learn the application specific commands. As you become more familiar with new applications, you may find it easier to use the commands specific to that program, or it might be easier for you to continue using these commands.

Commands for Moving within Tables

These commands move focus to the indicated cell and speak the contents. Cell and row coordinates as well as column and/or row heading information may also be provided.

  ---------------------- ----------------------------
  Description            Command
  Say Current Cell       ALT+CTRL+NUM PAD 5
  Cell to Right          ALT+CTRL+RIGHT ARROW
  Cell to Left           ALT+CTRL+LEFT ARROW
  Cell Below             ALT+CTRL+DOWN ARROW
  Cell Above             ALT+CTRL+UP ARROW
  First Cell             ALT+CTRL+HOME
  Last Cell              ALT+CTRL+END
  First Cell in Column   ALT+CTRL+SHIFT+UP ARROW
  Last Cell in Column    ALT+CTRL+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW
  First Cell in Row      ALT+CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT ARROW
  Last Cell in Row       ALT+CTRL+SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW
  ---------------------- ----------------------------

Table Reading Commands

  ------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------
  Description                           Command
  Say Current Cell                      ALT+CTRL+NUM PAD 5
  Read Next Row                         ALT+WINDOWS Key+DOWN ARROW
  Read Prior Row                        ALT+WINDOWS Key+UP ARROW
  Read Current Row                      ALT+WINDOWS Key+COMMA or ALT+WINDOWS Key+NUM PAD 5
  Read from Start of Row                INSERT+SHIFT+HOME
  Read to End of Row                    INSERT+SHIFT+PAGE UP
  Read Next Column                      ALT+WINDOWS Key+RIGHT ARROW
  Read Prior Column                     ALT+WINDOWS Key+LEFT ARROW
  Read Current Column                   ALT+WINDOWS Key+PERIOD
  Read from Top of Column               INSERT+SHIFT+END
  Read to Bottom of Column              INSERT+SHIFT+PAGE DOWN
  Toggle Revision Detection On or Off   INSERT+ALT+R
  ------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

JAWS Keystrokes for Accessing Help

  ---------------------------- -------------------------
  Description                  Command
  Screen Sensitive Help        INSERT+F1
  Keyboard Help                INSERT+1
  JAWS Help for Applications   INSERT+F1 twice quickly
  Hot Key Help                 INSERT+H
  Window Key Help              INSERT+W
  ---------------------------- -------------------------

Additional Notes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Laptop Keystrokes

This section contains information on keystrokes specific to the Laptop keyboard layout. The keyboard layout can be changed in the JAWS Application Window under the Options menu, in the Basics dialog. Few Laptop systems have keyboards with a number pad, so many of these functions have been shifted to the main section of the keyboard. Many of the keystrokes are not much different from the Desktop keyboard layout. Only those that are totally different are listed here.

The other keystrokes are all listed in the Desktop keystrokes section. When using the Laptop keyboard layout, just substitute the CAPS LOCK key for the INSERT key. For most of those keystrokes, the INSERT key works as well, however, you may find the CAPS LOCK key is a very easy to use substitute.

Note:  MAGic allows you to select which key is used as the MAGic Key. Since JAWS now provides the same flexibility for the JAWS Key, when the two products are used together, it is important that the MAGic Key and the JAWS key are not assigned to the same key. If they are assigned to the same key, any JAWS commands assigned to a key combination using the JAWS Key are not activated when the key combination is pressed.

Even if you use a desktop system or keyboard, you may wish to try the Laptop keyboard layout. When using the Laptop keyboard layout, most of your commands are right at your fingertips - as you type - so you do not need to continually switch your right hand to the number pad and back to the main section of your keyboard.

Laptop Keystrokes for Reading Text and Information

Laptop Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation

Choose your own JAWS Key

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Laptop Keystrokes for Reading Text and Information

+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Description                       | Command                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Character               | CAPS LOCK+M                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Character                | CAPS LOCK+PERIOD                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Character                     | CAPS LOCK+COMMA                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Character Phonetically        | CAPS LOCK+COMMA twice quickly                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Word                    | CAPS LOCK+J                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Word                     | CAPS LOCK+L                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Word                          | CAPS LOCK+K                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Spell Word                        | CAPS LOCK+K twice quickly                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Line                    | CAPS LOCK+U                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Line                     | CAPS LOCK+O                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Line                          | CAPS LOCK+I                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Spell Current Line                | CAPS LOCK+I twice quickly                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Sentence                | CAPS LOCK+Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Sentence                 | CAPS LOCK+N                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Sentence                      | CAPS LOCK+H                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Prior Paragraph               | CAPS LOCK+CTRL+U                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Next Paragraph                | CAPS LOCK+CTRL+O (Note: For Internet Explorer, this command opens a list that shows the objects available on the current Web page. The HTML Object tag embeds content such as Flash movies, JAVA applets, images, audio, and video.) |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Paragraph                     | CAPS LOCK+CTRL+I                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say to Cursor                     | CAPS LOCK+HOME or CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+J                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say from Cursor                   | CAPS LOCK+PAGE UP or CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+L                                                                                                                                                                                               |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Spell to Cursor                   | CAPS LOCK+HOME or  CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+J twice quickly                                                                                                                                                                                   |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Spell from Cursor                 | CAPS LOCK+PAGE UP or                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|                                   |  CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+L twice quickly                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say All                           | CAPS LOCK+A or CAPS LOCK+DOWN ARROW                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Selected Text                 | CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+A or CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW                                                                                                                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Color                         | CAPS LOCK+5                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Font                          | CAPS LOCK+F                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Top Line of Window            | CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Bottom Line of Window         | CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+N                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Report Battery Level              | CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+B                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say ASCII or Hexadecimal Value    | CAPS LOCK+COMMA three times quickly                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Say Current Table Cell            | ALT+SHIFT+COMMA                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Move to Prior Table Cell          | ALT+SHIFT+M                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Move to Next Table Cell           | ALT+SHIFT+PERIOD                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Move Up One Table Cell            | ALT+SHIFT+Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Move Down One Table Cell          | ALT+SHIFT+N                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Start Skim Reading                | CTRL+CAPS LOCK+DOWN ARROW                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Skim Reading dialog box           | CTRL+CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
+-----------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

Additional Notes

See also:

JAWS Keystrokes for Reading Text

Navigation - Information Keystrokes

Windows Keystrokes for Working with Text

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Laptop Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation

  ------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Description                                 Command
  PC Cursor                                   CAPS LOCK+SEMICOLON (press twice quickly if the Touch Cursor is currently active)
  JAWS Cursor                                 CAPS LOCK+P
  Invisible Cursor                            CAPS LOCK+P twice quickly
  Touch Cursor                                SHIFT+CAPS LOCK+SEMICOLON
  Route Touch Cursor to Focus Location        CAPS LOCK+APOSTROPHE
  Route PC Cursor to JAWS Cursor              CAPS LOCK+APOSTROPHE
  Route JAWS Cursor to PC Cursor              CAPS LOCK+LEFT BRACKET
  Restrict JAWS Cursor or Virtual PC Cursor   CAPS LOCK+R
  Left Mouse Button                           CAPS LOCK+8
  Right Mouse Button                          CAPS LOCK+9
  Left Mouse Button Lock                      CTRL+WINDOWS Key+8
  Right Mouse Button Lock                     CTRL+WINDOWS Key+9
  Drag and Drop                               CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+8
  Say Active Cursor                           ALT+DELETE
  Mouse Down                                  ALT+SHIFT+DOWN ARROW (when the JAWS Cursor is active)
  Mouse Left                                  ALT+SHIFT+LEFT ARROW (when the JAWS Cursor is active)
  Mouse Right                                 ALT+SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW (when the JAWS Cursor is active)
  Mouse Up                                    ALT+SHIFT+UP ARROW (when the JAWS Cursor is active)
  ------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Additional Notes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Standard Windows Keystrokes

This section contains listings of keystrokes that are part of Windows. JAWS does enhance some of these keystrokes so that what is being done is spoken, but these keystrokes work even without JAWS running. We have attempted to include the most useful Windows keystrokes, but have not attempted to compile a complete listing.

General Windows Keystrokes

General Windows Application Keystrokes

Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

Keystrokes for Working with Text in Documents

Keystrokes for Working in Windows Explorer

Keystrokes for Using the Clipboard

See also:

Keystrokes for Popular Applications

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

General Windows Keystrokes

  ------------------------------------ -------------------------------
  Description                          Command
  Get Help                             F1
  Open the Start Menu                  WINDOWS LOGO KEY or CTRL+ESC
  Switch between Open Applications     ALT+TAB
  Open the Shortcut Menu               APPLICATIONS KEY or SHIFT+F10
  Minimize all Applications            WINDOWS LOGO KEY+M
  Find a File or Folder from Desktop   F3
  Move to First Item on the Taskbar    WINDOWS LOGO KEY+TAB
  Open Windows Explorer                WINDOWS LOGO KEY+E
  Open Run Dialog                      WINDOWS LOGO KEY+R
  ------------------------------------ -------------------------------

Additional notes

See also:

Navigation - Information Keystrokes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

General Windows Application Keystrokes

  ----------------------------------- -----------------
  Description                         Command
  Exit the Active Application         ALT+F4
  Open the Application Control Menu   ALT+SPACEBAR
  Move to the Menu Bar                ALT
  Move between Menus                  ALT, ARROW KEYS
  Choose a Menu Item                  ENTER
  Open a child Window Control Menu    ALT+DASH
  Cancel or close a Menu              ESC or ALT
  ----------------------------------- -----------------

Additional Notes

See also:

Navigation - Information Keystrokes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Windows Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

  --------------------------------------- ---------------------------
  Description                             Command
  Move through Dialog Controls            TAB
  Move Backward through Dialog Controls   SHIFT+TAB
  Move to Another Page                    CTRL+TAB
  Reverse Direction through Pages         CTRL+SHIFT+TAB
  Select/Deselect in List View            SPACEBAR or CTRL+SPACEBAR
  Toggle a Check Box ON/OFF               SPACEBAR
  --------------------------------------- ---------------------------

Additional Notes

See also:

JAWS Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Windows Keystrokes for Working with Text

  --------------------------------- -------------------------
  Description                       Command
  Move One Character Left           LEFT ARROW
  Move One Character Right          RIGHT ARROW
  Move One Word Left                CTRL+LEFT ARROW
  Move One Word Right               CTRL+RIGHT ARROW
  Move to Beginning of Line         HOME
  Move to End of Line               END
  Move One Paragraph Up             CTRL+UP ARROW
  Move One Paragraph Down           CTRL+DOWN ARROW
  Move to Top of Next Page          CTRL+PAGE DOWN
  Move to Top of Previous Page      CTRL+PAGE UP
  Move to Beginning of Document     CTRL+HOME
  Move to End of Document           CTRL+END
  Scroll Up or Down One Screen      PAGE UP or PAGE DOWN
  Select One Character Left         SHIFT+LEFT ARROW
  Select One Character Right        SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW
  Select One Word Left              CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT ARROW
  Select One Word Right             CTRL+SHIFT+RIGHT ARROW 
  Select to Beginning of Line       SHIFT+HOME
  Select to End of Line             SHIFT+END
  Select to Beginning of Document   CTRL+SHIFT+HOME
  Select to End of Document         CTRL+SHIFT+END
  Select All                        CTRL+A
  Undo                              CTRL+Z
  Delete Current Character          DELETE
  Delete Prior Character            BACKSPACE
  --------------------------------- -------------------------

Additional Notes

See also:

Keystrokes for Using the Clipboard

JAWS Keystrokes for Reading Text

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Working in Windows Explorer

  ---------------------------------------- --------------------
  Description                              Command
  Delete Selected File or Folder           DELETE
  Rename Selected File or Folder           F2
  Refresh Window                           F5
  Switch Between Tree View and List View   F6 or TAB
  Go Up One Folder Level                   BACKSPACE
  Open File or Folder Properties           ALT+ENTER
  Untruncate Columns in List View          CTRL+NUM PAD PLUS 
  ---------------------------------------- --------------------

Additional Notes.

See Also:

Keystrokes for Using the Clipboard

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Using the Clipboard

  ---------------------------------------------- ----------------------
  Description                                    Command
  Copy Selected File or Text to Clipboard        CTRL+C
  Cut Selected File or Text to Clipboard         CTRL+X
  Paste Contents of Clipboard                    CTRL+V
  Read Clipboard Contents                        WINDOWS Key+INSERT+X
  Display Clipboard Contents in Results Viewer   INSERT+SPACEBAR, C
  ---------------------------------------------- ----------------------

Tip: You also can press INSERT+WINDOWS Key+C to copy selected text to the FSClipboard. Text that you copied with this keystroke is added to any text that you have previously copied to the Clipboard, instead of replacing it. This allows you to continue adding text to the Clipboard until you are ready to paste it into a document. For more information, see Using the Clipboard.

See also:

Using the Clipboard

JAWS Keystrokes for Reading Text

Keystrokes for Working in Windows Explorer

Windows Keystrokes for Working with Text

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Popular Applications

Windows

Internet

E-Mail

Word Processing

Spreadsheet, Financial, and Database

Multimedia

Utilities

Programming Tools

Miscellaneous

 

  ------ --- --------------
  Back       Next Section
  ------ --- --------------

 

Quick Settings Overview

Quick Settings makes it easy to change application-specific settings as well as individual document settings. With Quick Settings you have the ability to easily:

·         Change settings for individual documents or applications.

·         Determine whether changes will still be in effect after your JAWS session has ended, when the computer is rebooted, or when a new window gains focus. Note that the persistency level cannot be set for individual document settings. Document settings will always be written to disk.

To open Quick Settings, press INSERT+V.

What is the advantage of using Quick Settings?

When using the Adjust JAWS Options tree view in previous JAWS versions, it was not clear if changes were being applied specifically to an application or document, or globally as JAWS default settings. To get around this issue, Quick Settings offers persistence levels, which are quickly accessed through a context menu by pressing the APPLICATIONS key. The current persistence setting is indicated with an icon in the tree view and a check mark in the context menu. The icons are useful for a sighted trainer since it shows the current level settings at a glance. Persistence levels are labeled as follows:

·         Restore settings when JAWS exits. Think of this as session specific. When you close JAWS, the setting returns to its default value. This persistence is represented by the JAWS icon in the tree view.

·         Restore settings when focus changes. When you change focus to another application or document, the setting returns to its default value. This persistence is represented by the double window icon in the tree view.

·         Save the settings. When selected, the current value becomes the default and is written to disk. This level is represented by the disk drive icon in the tree view.

Note: If you intend to adjust persistence, from the default (save to disk), you must set the persistence level for the setting before changing the setting. Persistence levels for document-specific settings cannot be changed, therefore, the context menu does not display. In this case, any changes made to the setting are immediately saved to disk.

How does it differ from Settings Center?

The Quick Settings window is very similar to that used by Settings Center. It has a search box, settings tree view pane, configuration display pane, and help message pane. The major difference is that you can set how long changes to settings will apply for individual documents or applications. This is known as the persistence level.

Note:  You cannot switch to the JAWS default file (default.jcf) when using Quick Settings. To make default changes that apply to ALL applications, use Settings Center.

How do I use Quick Settings?

To launch Quick Settings in any application or document,

1.    Press INSERT+V. This convenient keystroke is the same that was used to open the Adjust JAWS Options tree view.
 
 For example, with a Word document open, press INSERT+V.
 

2.    The cursor moves to the Search box. If you know the setting that you want to change, type a term for it in the Search box. Next, press DOWN ARROW to move to the filtered results in the tree view. 
 
 For example, type the term “typing” (without the quotes), press DOWN ARROW to move to Typing Echo in the filtered result list, and then press ENTER. Focus now moves to Typing Echo in the tree view. The default setting for Typing Echo is Characters.
 

3.    If you want to change the persistence level, press the APPLICATIONS key, and then select Restore settings when JAWS exits, or Restore settings when focus changes. (Note that Save the settings is always the default selection when viewing persistence levels for the first time.)
 
 For example, press the ARROW keys to move to Restore Settings when Focus Changes and then press ENTER.
 

4.    Next, press SPACEBAR to change combo box values, or select check boxes, radio buttons, or other buttons, and then press ENTER. (You can also press F6 to jump between the tree view and the Configuration pane to change settings.) The setting now uses both the selected persistence level and the selected value. The value is saved permanently, or until you change focus, or close JAWS as set by the persistence level.
 
 For example, press SPACEBAR to select None as the Typing Echo setting, and then press ENTER. As long as focus remains in the current Word document, typing is not echoed. When you move focus away from the document to another application and then back to the Word document, the value for Typing Echo is restored to Characters.

Which files are affected by Quick Settings?

Changes made using Quick Settings are stored in the current application’s JCF file or the current document’s JSI file. These files, along with other persistence level files, are stored in your user settings folder. It can be found by selecting Start Menu, All Programs, JAWS X (where X is version 13 or later), Explore JAWS, and then Explore My Settings.

 
 

 

  ------ --- --------------
  Back       Next Section
  ------ --- --------------

 

Importing and Exporting User Settings

JAWS enables you to easily import or export user settings including application and default settings, custom scripts, dictionary entries, graphics labels, PlaceMarkers, flexible web rules, personalized web settings including custom labels, speech and sounds schemes, and voice profiles. When exporting, settings information is collected and stored in a single SBAK file which you can store on external media for backup purposes, or distribute to other users through email or a file sharing service such as Dropbox. This SBAK file can then be easily imported on any computer running JAWS 18 or later and these settings will be used by that copy of JAWS. If you import settings received from another user and you are not happy with how the imported settings are working, you can restore back to the previous settings.

Some instances of when you might use this feature include:

·         You want to use the same JAWS settings on multiple computers, such as in a training center or school computer lab.

·         You create a lot of customizations and you want to be able to back them up so you can easily import them when you install a new version of JAWS, eliminating the task of having to manually reconfigure everything.

·         A friend would like to use some of your flexible web rules and voice profiles. You could use the Export Settings wizard to only export these particular settings, send the file to your friend, and if they are running JAWS 18 or later, they can import the file containing your flexible web rules and voice profiles into their copy of JAWS.

·         A script developer could send you an SBAK file containing custom scripts and settings for an application that is used at your job and the Import Settings wizard will quickly import all settings and script files to the correct locations in your JAWS user folder.

Exporting Settings

To export all of your JAWS user settings, do the following:

1.    From the JAWS application window, open the Utilities menu, open the Import/Export submenu, and select Export Settings. The Export User Settings wizard opens with the Export All Settings radio button selected by default.

2.    Choose Next and you are prompted to enter the location and name for the SBAK file. By default, the SBAK file is saved to the Desktop using the name JAWSVersion NumberSettingsBackup (where Version Number is the JAWS version currently running when performing the export). You can type a different file name into the edit field, or use the Browse button to choose a different folder location which will be used as the default location the next time you use the export or import utility.

3.    The Comments edit box allows you to optionally add additional information about the backup. Providing comments about why the backup was created could be useful especially if you plan on sharing the SBAK file with other JAWS users.

4.    Choose Finish to create the backup file.

Sometimes, you may only want to export specific settings. For example, you may have custom scripts and settings for a particular application that you want to provide to another user, or you have personalized settings for a web site that a friend has asked you to share.

To choose what JAWS settings are exported, do the following:

1.    From the JAWS application window, open the Utilities menu, open the Import/Export submenu, and select Export Settings. The Export User Settings wizard opens.

2.    Select the Export Specified Settings radio button and choose Next.

3.    You are placed in a tree view containing all the settings in your JAWS user folder. All items are selected by default. Use the SPACEBAR to clear the settings you do not want included in the export and then choose Next.

Note: Pressing the APPLICATIONS key on the selected item and then pressing ENTER on File Information opens a dialog box displaying the full path to the location of the current settings file. Choose OK to close this dialog box.

4.    You are prompted to enter the location and name for the SBAK file. By default, the SBAK file is saved to the Desktop using the name JAWSSettingsBackup (where Version Number is the JAWS version currently running when performing the export). You can type a different file name into the edit field, or use the Browse button to choose a different folder location which will be used as the default location the next time you use the export or import utility.

5.    The Comments edit box allows you to optionally add additional information about the backup. Providing comments about why the backup was created could be useful especially if you plan on sharing the SBAK file with other JAWS users.

6.    Choose Finish to create the backup file.

Importing Settings

To import settings from an SBAK file, do the following:

1.    From the JAWS application window, open the Utilities menu, open the Import/Export submenu, and select Import Settings. The Import User Settings wizard opens.

2.    In the Select a Backup File edit box, type the name of the SBAK file you want to import. Alternatively, choose the Browse button to navigate to the location where you saved the file and select it. The Desktop is used as the default location unless you saved a backup file to a different folder using the Export Settings utility, or you import a backup file from a different folder.

3.    After selecting the backup file to import, the Archive Information and Comments read-only edit box displays information about the backup. This includes the backup source, the version of JAWS that created the backup, date and time the backup was created, and any optional comments added by the user who created the file. Once you have finished reviewing this information, choose Next.

4.    Review the settings that will be imported and then choose Next.

5.    You are asked if you want to delete all existing settings files before importing. Select the radio button that corresponds to how you want settings to be imported, then choose Next. By default, the option to merge settings from the backup with existing settings is selected. If you want to just replace the entire contents of your JAWS user settings folder with the contents of the backup, select the option to delete all settings and import.

6.    If you choose the option to merge settings, you are then prompted to choose what to do if a setting in your user folder conflicts with a setting from the backup file. Select the Update Current Settings radio button to replace the existing setting with the setting from the backup file, or select the Keep Current Settings radio button to not replace the setting in your user folder with the setting from the backup file. The Update Current Settings radio button is selected by default. After selecting the option you want, choose Next.

7.    The final page of this wizard displays a summary of your import selections. Once you have reviewed this information, choose Finish to import the settings. If there are existing settings in your user folder, they are automatically backed up so they can be restored if necessary. Refer to the following section on restoring settings for more information.

8.    Once the import is complete, a dialog box opens and displays the results of the import process. After reviewing this information, choose OK to close the dialog box.

Restoring Settings

When importing settings from an SBAK file, any existing settings in your user folder are automatically backed up. This enables you to restore your previous settings in case the settings you imported do not work as expected. To restore settings, do the following:

Warning: Performing a restore will completely delete any existing user settings.

1.    From the JAWS application window, open the Utilities menu, open the Import/Export submenu, and select Restore Settings. The Restore User Settings dialog box opens.

2.    Select the backup file you want to restore from and choose Restore. If there is more than one automatic backup file available, the most recent one is listed first.

3.    Once the restore is complete, a dialog box opens and displays the results of the restore process. After reviewing this information, choose OK to close the dialog box.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Using the Synthesizer and Braille Manager

The Synthesizer and Braille Manager allows you to add, modify, or remove synthesizer and braille display drivers. Adding synthesizers or braille displays makes them available from the JAWS user interface. Modifications can include changing the default synthesizer or braille display and changing the output port, if applicable. Removing the devices will only remove them from the JAWS user interface. The device files will remain on the computer until JAWS is uninstalled.

To start the Synthesizer and Braille Manager, do one of the following:

·         Open the Utilities menu and choose Synthesizer and Braille Manager, or.

·         Choose Synthesizer and Braille Manager from the Tools menu in the JAWS Start menu program group.
 
 When you start this utility, a tree view of all synthesizer and braille display drivers installed on your computer displays.

To add, change, or delete devices, do the following:

1.    Choose the Add, Remove, or Change Devices button.

2.    If you want to select synthesizers, select the Speech Synthesizers radio button. If you want to select braille displays, select the Braille Displays radio button.

3.    Choose the Next button.

4.    A list of available devices displays. To add or remove a device, use the arrow keys to select it in the list and then press the SPACEBAR to select or clear the check box. After you have selected all devices that you want to use, choose the Next button.

5.    If you are selecting synthesizers, you are asked to choose a default synthesizer that JAWS will use each time you start the program. If you are selecting braille displays, you are asked to choose a default braille display. After you have made a selection, choose the Next button.

6.    If you are modifying braille displays, you are asked to specify your device settings.

7.    Choose Finish to complete the process. The braille displays and synthesizers that you selected are now installed.

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Sound Cards

For instructions describing how to select a sound card for JAWS speech output when multiple sound cards are installed, go to Selecting a Sound Card for JAWS Speech. For an overview of multiple sound card operation with JAWS, read the following information.

Windows typically makes the last sound card added to your system the default sound card. This means that JAWS speech automatically goes to the new audio device, which can be frustrating if you want to use that device for something other than JAWS.

Using JAWS, you can override the Windows default selection, and choose which sound card to use for speech and JAWS event sound output. For example, if you are editing music, you can let Windows direct your music through a higher-end audio card while JAWS directs its speech output to an inexpensive sound card in your computer. You do this by selecting an audio card for JAWS from the Sound Card submenu list under the JAWS Utilities menu.

Things to Remember About the Sound Card List 

·         In Control Panel, a single sound card can appear as multiple sound devices, for example, as speakers, as a digital audio interface, as HDMI output, and so on.

·         Any audio device identified in the list as a "digital" item may not have speakers connected. If you select this item, you may lose speech.

·         Make sure to plug in speakers or a headset to any internal or external USB device that you want to use for JAWS speech.

·         When only one sound card is installed in your computer, the JAWS Sound Card submenu will always show two items: the Windows default sound card, and the name of the installed sound card. These two items represent the same audio device. By default, JAWS will choose the Windows default sound card item in the list and will identify it with a check mark. This means that when you add another sound card, JAWS will use it because Windows makes the most recently added sound card the Windows default audio device. The Windows default sound card can change as you add or remove audio devices.
 
 However, if you choose the sound card by its name, it becomes the audio device that JAWS uses for speech output. JAWS identifies it with a check mark in the submenu. When you add another sound card to your computer, the new sound card will also appear by name in the Sound Card submenu list. Although the Windows operating system will make the newly added sound card the Windows default sound card, JAWS will continue to use the first sound card since you selected it by name from the submenu list. Even as you add and remove other sound devices from the system, JAWS will continue to use this sound card for speech output.
 
 Finally, if you select a specific sound card to use for JAWS speech output, and then remove that card from the system, JAWS will automatically fall back to the Windows default sound card item in the submenu list. This means that JAWS will use the same sound card that the Windows operating system identifies as the default audio card. If you later restore the sound card to the system, JAWS will again send speech output to that card instead of the Windows default sound card.

 

Selecting a Sound Card for JAWS Speech

To select a sound card for JAWS speech and JAWS event sounds, do the following:

1.    Press INSERT+J to open the JAWS application window.

2.    Press ALT+U to open the Utilities menu, and then O to open the Sound Cards submenu. It shows a list of devices currently installed. A check mark indicates which sound card is configured for JAWS output.

Note: The first item that always appears in the list is labeled Windows default sound card.  It is the same sound card that Windows recognizes as the default sound device in the Control Panel. This is typically the most recent audio device added to the system.

3.    Use the UP or DOWN ARROW keys to move to a sound device, and then press ENTER to select the card. The menu closes and JAWS now uses the selected card. The next time you open the Sound Cards submenu, the selected card will have a check mark.

 

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       | Next                  |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

 

Graphics Labeler Overview

Windows is a graphical user interface. A graphic can be an icon, toolbar button, or a picture in an application or on the Internet. Many graphics that you encounter in Windows are labeled. When you navigate over a graphic, JAWS reads these labels to you. Some graphics are not labeled. In this case you will hear, "Graphic XXX." The numbers you hear after the word graphic are assigned by JAWS. With JAWS, you can label graphics that don’t already have a label specified. You can label graphics automatically or manually. You may need sighted assistance, to help you determine what the graphic is so that you can label it appropriately.

After you label your graphics, you can choose to save these labels to the specific application or to the default file. If you save the graphics labels in the default file, the label will always be recognized unless it is labeled differently by an application.

Creating a Graphic Label Manually

Using the Auto Graphics Labeler

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Creating a Graphic Label Manually

To practice creating a Graphic Label, use HJPad. To launch HJPad go to Start, All Programs, JAWS X (where X is the JAWS version number), Run HJPad.

Using the Graphics Labeler is easy, but before you start ensure that JAWS is set to speak graphics. Follow these steps to be sure:

1.    With HJPad open, press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings.

2.    In the Search box, type the term "graphics" (without the quotes), and then press DOWN ARROW to move to the Graphics option in the tree view.

3.    Press the SPACEBAR until you hear JAWS say, "All."

4.    Next, press ENTER to accept the change, and then close Quick Settings.

Now that all graphics will be spoken, you are ready to find a graphic to label.

1.    Press the NUM PAD MINUS key to activate the JAWS cursor.

Tip:    To navigate to the toolbar, first press PAGE UP to move to the top of the window, and then press HOME to move to the top, left.

2.    Use the ARROW Keys to move to the first toolbar button. You will hear, "Graphic XXX." XXX can indicate any number.

3.    Press INSERT+G to open the Graphics Labeler.

4.    When the Graphics Labeler is opened, the focus is in the edit field, where you should enter the label for the graphic. It will contain the graphic and the number that is assigned to it. Type the name for your graphic.

5.    Press the TAB key to move to the braille label field. Here you can enter a label for a braille display.

6.    Next press the TAB key to move to a group of radio buttons that will let you determine where you want to save the label, in the application file, default file, or both files.

7.    Press ENTER to activate your graphic label.

Note: To edit a graphic label, use the same procedure that you would to create a new graphic label, and just change the name of the label in the Graphics Labeler when it opens. To delete a graphic label, do the same, but delete the name in the Graphics Labeler.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Using the Auto Graphics Labeler

The Auto Graphics Labeler assigns a text label to all graphics that are associated with ToolTips. A ToolTip is a brief description of a graphic that appears on the screen as you point to the graphic with your mouse.

To activate the Auto Graphics Labeler, open the desired application, and press CTRL+INSERT+G.

JAWS will attempt to label all graphics. Do not move the mouse or press any keys on the keyboard until JAWS states that the Auto Graphics Labeler is finished. When JAWS finishes, it will announce the newly labeled graphics.

After using the Auto Graphics Labeler, you can use CTRL+INSERT+SHIFT+G to bring up the Select Graphic to Click Dialog box. With this dialog box, you can use your arrow keys to move through the available graphics, and then press the TAB key to move to the OK button and press ENTER to activate the graphic you selected.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Add and Change Prompts

Prompts are labels for controls in dialog boxes. Some of the time, JAWS does not read a prompt, or the prompt that is provided is not very meaningful. Now, when you find a prompt like this, just assign the prompt you want JAWS to speak and display in Braille. And if you want a brief reminder spoken whenever you move to a particular control, just add a custom tutor message to provide this information.

Creating a Prompt

Custom Tutor Messages

Deleting Prompts

Troubleshooting Prompts

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Creating a Prompt

To create a prompt:

1.    Move to the control for which the prompt is not properly spoken.

2.    Press CTRL+INSERT+TAB.

3.    A dialog box appears to walk you through the creation of the prompt. On the first page, enter the prompt for the control as you want JAWS to speak it, and then select Next.

4.    On the second page, enter the prompt for the control as you want JAWS to display it in Braille, and then select Next.

5.    On the third page, specify a Tutor message to provide assistance with navigation or the use of this control. If you leave the Tutor message blank, the default message is used. Select Finish to create your prompt.

Note: You can also press INSERT+F2 to open the Run JAWS Manager dialog and select Prompt Create from the list to create a prompt.

If you wish to change a prompt you have assigned, just press CTRL+INSERT+TAB again and change the labels you entered.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Custom Tutor Messages

The Prompt Creator dialogs can be used to create custom Tutor messages. Even if you don't want to change a control's prompt, you can still add a Tutor message that provides you tips to remind you of the purpose of a control.

When you create a Prompt, the field for specifying a spoken prompt initially contains what JAWS believes the prompt is. If you do not change this, and select the Next button, the prompt to be displayed in Braille contains this same information. If you select Next without changing this, you can add the Tutor message you wish to use without modifying the spoken or Brailled prompt for the control.

Tutor messages are a great tool for familiarizing yourself with windows and applications. If you no longer need these messages, you can turn them off, but still hear the custom Tutor messages you have added. In the JAWS application window, Options, Basic Settings, set the Tutor Messages group of radio buttons to Announce Custom Messages Only. And if you wish to hear Tutor messages for menus and controls, as well as the custom Tutor messages you have added, just leave this group of radio buttons set to Announce Menu and Control Help. However, you cannot choose to hear both a custom Tutor message and a default Tutor message for the same control.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Deleting Prompts

To delete a prompt you have created:

1.    Navigate to the dialog or window containing the control for which you created the prompt.

2.    press INSERT+F2, select Frame Viewer, and press ENTER.

3.    TAB to the frame with the name of the prompt you wish to delete and press the DELETE key.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Troubleshooting Prompts

Creating prompts is a straightforward process and you will seldom run into any difficulties. However, there are a few situations within which your prompts may need to be slightly reconfigured for best results. There are also situations within which it is necessary to create your prompts in a specific manner. Several of these situations are listed below with our recommendations for how to make your prompts work best.

A prompt is Recognized in Several Dialogs

Prompts in Multipage Dialogs

A Prompt that does not Size to the Control

A Prompt is Recognized in Several Dialogs

It is possible FOR a prompt to be recognized within several dialogs within the same application. This can only occur when the dialogs in an application use similar names and the controls in them are laid out similarly.

When prompts are created, the text from the title of the dialog in which the control is located is recorded. The prompt is then available whenever a dialog in that application containing that text is opened. Because of this, if you create a prompt in a dialog titled "Options," and that same application also has a dialog named "Format Options" or something else containing the word "options," the prompt is recognized in that dialog as well. And if there is a control in that dialog in the same position as that for which you created the prompt, the prompt is spoken when you TAB to that control.

To correct this:

1.    Open the dialog where you created the prompt.

2.    Press INSERT+F2 to open the Run JAWS Manager dialog, select Frame Viewer, and press ENTER.

3.    TAB to the frame with the name of your prompt.

4.    Press ALT+ENTER to open properties for the frame.

5.    Press CTRL+TAB to move to the Validation Rules page of this dialog.

6.    Select the Window Title rule and press ALT+M to modify it.

7.    Do not change the rule type. Move to Next and press ENTER.

8.    Change the comparison type from Contains to Is and select Next.

9.    Do not change the comparison value. Select Finish.

10. You should be back in the Validation Rules page of properties. Press ENTER.

11. Press CTRL+S to save changes.

12. Press ESC to exit Frame Viewer.

Your prompt should now work only in the dialog for which it was intended.

Prompts in Multipage Dialogs

Prompts created within multipage dialogs may be recognized within several pages of the dialog. This is because the title of the dialog is used to determine when the prompt is available, and the title of multipage dialogs do not change as you move from page to page.

To prevent this, the prompt must look for something unique in the page of the dialog where it was created. We recommend identifying text of some sort within the page, which is not present in any other pages of the dialog. Once you have identified such text, follow these steps to set your prompt to only be available when that text is present.

1.    Open the dialog to the page where you created the prompt.

2.    Press INSERT+F2 to open the Run JAWS Manager dialog, select Frame Viewer, and press ENTER.

3.    TAB to the frame with the name of your prompt.

4.    Press ALT+ENTER to open properties for the frame.

5.    Press CTRL+TAB to move to the Validation Rules page of this dialog.

6.    Press ALT+A to modify a new rule.

7.    Set the rule type to Window Text. Move to Next and press ENTER.

8.    Leave the comparison type set to Contains, and select Next.

9.    For the comparison value, type in the text you identified as unique to the page of the dialog where you want your prompt to work. Press TAB to move to the Add button and press ENTER. Then select Finish.

10. You should be back in the Validation Rules page of properties. Press ENTER.

11. Press CTRL+S to save changes.

12. Press ESC to exit Frame Viewer.

A Prompt that does not Size to the Control

You may find situations where a prompt you create does not correctly size to the control or area of the screen in which you want to use it. One example of this is when creating prompts for use in terminal emulation software. In these cases, it may be necessary to create the prompt in another manner.

You can use the JAWS cursor to specify the exact position of the top left and bottom right corners of your prompt, limiting it to the exact area where you need it.

1.    With the JAWS cursor, navigate to the top, left corner of the area you want included in the prompt.

2.    Press CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT BRACKET.

3.    Move to the bottom, right corner of the area you wish to include in the prompt, and press CTRL+SHIFT+RIGHT BRACKET.

4.    A dialog box appears asking you if you wish to create a frame or a prompt. Select to create a prompt.

The standard Prompt Creator dialogs appear. Fill out the information on each page just like with any other prompt.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Introduction to Frames

Frames are a quick, easy way to make your applications more accessible. A frame is a rectangular area of a window or the screen you define so JAWS knows to monitor it for any activity that might take place.

What Frames Do

Frames can do many things. Some of the more common uses are:

·         Speak or Braille information at the press of a keystroke.

·         Speak or Braille information when you TAB to a control within the borders of the frame.

·         Speak or Braille information when text is newly displayed within the borders of the frame.

·         Prevent JAWS from automatically speaking information.

Quickly list all of your currently active frames by pressing INSERT+F9. Select a frame in the list and press ENTER and the JAWS cursor is moved to that frame.

Press CTRL+INSERT+A to quickly display the names and textual content of all currently active frames within the Virtual Viewer. Easily select text and copy it to the clipboard. Use standard reading commands to read the information. Each frame's name is a link, and selecting one of these links moves the JAWS cursor to that frame. This feature makes it very easy to interact with text without moving focus away from the control or window where you were working, and will save many people a lot of time in terminal emulation programs, call centers, and many other situations.

Working with Frames

Frames are now much easier to work with and modify. We provide a totally new interface that is easier to use for everyone. In Frame Viewer, frames are visible on the screen, and standard commands let you easily move between them, move and resize them, and access their properties. Refer to Frame Viewer.

Frames also provide the support to make it possible to quickly and easily create prompts for controls when the prompt does not speak or does not provide useful information. Refer to Add and Change Prompts.

Designing Effective Frames

With frames, there are three main things to consider:

Position: Your frame needs to be properly positioned. The frame's size and location determine what areas of the screen or window are monitored. Frames should be positioned based on what information you want them to speak, what you want them to do, or what activity occurring in your application you wish to have cause the frame to do something. Frames are positioned when they are first created, and easy to use methods are provided for you to move or resize a frame within Frame Viewer.

Validation Rules: Frames set rules to compare information in your application with information that is specified when each frame is created. This ensures frames are only available where you need to use them. Frames should be limited so they only work where you need them. If you design a series of three or four frames to make a specific dialog box in Microsoft Word more accessible, the frames should only be active in that dialog box. If they are active in other Word dialog boxes, you will receive unpredictable, and possibly very confusing results.

Events and Actions: Events are the activities that cause your frames to perform some action. Set your frames to do something when a key is pressed, when text is newly displayed within the borders of the frame, when you move to a control within the borders of a frame, or when one of these events occur within another frame. Assign the actions you wish to occur to each event, and a frame can do many things, naturally responding as you work in your application.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Creating a Frame

1.    With the JAWS cursor, navigate to the top, left corner of the area you want included in the frame.

2.    Press CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT BRACKET.

3.    Move to the bottom, right corner of the area you wish to include in the frame, and press CTRL+SHIFT+RIGHT BRACKET.

4.    A dialog box appears asking you if you wish to create a frame or a prompt. Select to create a frame.

5.    A dialog appears to walk you through the creation of the frame. On the first page, enter the name of the frame and select Next.

Note: Frame names cannot contain spaces or symbols. We recommend concatenating the names, capitalizing the start of each word.

6.    The second page asks for a synopsis of the frame's purpose. Fill out the information and select Next. This information is very important if others are going to use your frames.

7.    The third page asks for a more detailed description of the frame's purpose. Fill out the information and select Next. This information is very important if others are going to use your frames.

8.    The fourth page prompts you to assign a keystroke to the frame. If you choose to assign a keystroke, text within the frame is spoken when the keystroke is pressed. This functionality is added as a frame event and can be modified later.

9.    The fifth page prompts you to specify how JAWS will echo text newly written within the frame. Select JAWS Screen Echo, Silent, Highlight, or All. These settings correspond to using the current JAWS screen echo setting, or specifying which screen echo setting to use. This functionality is added through use of Frame Events. For information on what Frame Event is added based on your selection, please refer to Default Frame Events. After selecting an option, select Finish to continue.

Tip: Move the JAWS cursor to a control or window, and press CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT BRACKET twice quickly to set the frame to the current control or window. Then fill in the information as stated above.

At this point, the frame is created, but not saved. Focus is on the frame, and Frame Viewer is active. Press the Applications key to open the context menu for the frame.

·         Select Save Changes from the menu to save the frame.

·         Select Properties to modify settings for the frame.

·         If you select Exit Frames Mode without first saving the frame, a dialog prompts you to save your changes.

Tip: Sighted users of JAWS may find it easier and more straightforward to create a frame by opening Frame Viewer, selecting Options, Create New Frame, and after filling in the information in the Create a Frame dialogs, sizing and positioning the frame with the mouse. By default, frames created in this manner are sized to the current control or window.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Frame Viewer

Frame Viewer is where you work with frames. Move between them, move them, resize them, or open a frame's properties and adjust settings.

To open Frame Viewer, press INSERT+F2, move to Frame Viewer, and press ENTER.

The Frame Viewer displays all active frames for the current application and the Frames Mode buttons. Focus is initially on the first of these frames. (This is determined by which frame was first created.) Press TAB to move through the frames. If you continue to press TAB until you have moved through all the frames, focus moves to the Frame Viewer buttons.

There are four Frame Viewer buttons: Options, Frames List, Help, and Close. These buttons let you access very useful features, and most all these features, and more, are accessible right from any frame. If you open Frame Viewer and no frames are active, focus is on the Options button.

Commands Available from any Frame

Frames Context Menu

Positioning Frames

Frame Viewer Toolbox

Commands Available from any Frame

  ---------------------------- -------------------------------
  Description                  Command
  Read Text in Frame           INSERT+DOWN ARROW
  Move Between Frames          Tab or SHIFT+TAB
  Open Frame Properties        ALT+ENTER
  Open Context Menu            APPLICATIONS KEY or SHIFT+F10
  Save All Changes to Frames   CTRL+S
  Delete Current Frame         DELETE
  ---------------------------- -------------------------------

Frames Context Menu

The context menu for a frame is opened by pressing the APPLICATIONS key. The following options are available from this context menu.

Frame Properties: Opens a multi page dialog containing General Properties, Validation Rules, Events, and Position information. Refer to Frame Properties for more information.

Status: Use this submenu to temporarily disable and enable frames.

Move: Use this option to move the frame, right from the keyboard, while receiving spoken feedback. Refer to Moving Frames for more information.

Resize: Use this option to resize the frame, right from the keyboard, while receiving spoken feedback. Refer to Resizing Frames for more information.

Events: Opens the Frame Properties dialog to the Events page. Refer to Events Properties for more information.

Save Changes: Saves changes to all frames.

Frames List: Opens a dialog listing frames currently active, or frames in the current application. Refer to Frames List for more information.

Delete: Deletes the current frame.

Hide Titles: Temporarily hides frame titles.

Exit Frame Viewer: Exits frame viewer. If changes have been made, but not saved, you are prompted to save changes.

Positioning Frames

One of the primary factors determining how well a frame will work is how effectively it is positioned. Frames are positioned in the following ways.

·         When you create a frame,you can size and position the frame to the current control or window, or you can specify the exact location of the top left corner and bottom right corner. For more information, refer to Creating a Frame.

·         Open Frame Viewer, press TAB to move to an existing frame, press ALT+ENTER to open the current frame's properties, and press CTRL+TAB to move to the position page. Modify the settings in this dialog to adjust the location and size of the frame. For more information, refer to Position Properties.

·         Open Frame Viewer, press TAB to move to an existing frame, and select Move or Resize from the frame's context menu, and use the arrow keys to adjust the position or size of the frame. This method allows you to adjust a frame's size and/or position right within Frame Viewer, and provides spoken feedback as you move or resize a frame.

·         Use your mouse to drag a frame by its title bar to a new location, or to drag a border to resize the frame.

Tip: When a person, working visually, uses the mouse to move the mouse pointer over the edge of a frame, the mouse changes shape and becomes a double arrow. If they click and hold the left mouse button they can now drag the edge to change the frame size. When they release the left mouse button, the changed size is retained. They can continue sizing by moving the mouse to another edge and repeating the process. If they simply want to move the frame they would click and hold the left mouse button with the mouse on the title bar of the frame. While the mouse button is held down the person can move the frame freely around the screen. When they release the mouse button, the new position is retained.

Enable Show Window Contents

If you select the context menu items and use the arrow keys to move or resize a frame, you first need to check the Show Window Contents While Dragging check box in the Effects page of Display Properties. This will ensure you receive the maximum feedback while you are moving or resizing a frame. To do this:

1.    Press the WINDOWS KEY to open the Start Menu.

2.    Select Settings, Control Panel.

3.    Select Display Properties.

4.    Press CTRL+TAB until you are at the Effects page.

5.    TAB to the Show Window Contents While Dragging check box and press SPACEBAR to check it if it is not already checked.

This ensures you receive spoken feedback as you move or resize a frame. If you do not check this check box, you still receive spoken feedback, but only after completing the operation.

Moving Frames

To move frames with the arrow keys:

1.    Press INSERT+F2, move to Frame Viewer, and press ENTER.

2.    TAB to the frame you wish to reposition.

3.    Press the APPLICATIONS key. Then press M.

4.    Press the arrow key corresponding to the direction you wish to move the frame. As you press arrow keys and the frame moves, the distance in pixels is reported.

5.    Press INSERT+DOWN ARROW to hear what text is within the borders of the frame. This should assist you in verifying the frame is positioned where you need it.

6.    Press ENTER when the frame is positioned where you want it, or press ESC to cancel the operation.

Resizing Frames

To resize a frame with the arrow keys:

1.    Press INSERT+F2, move to Frame Viewer, and press ENTER.

2.    TAB to the frame you wish to resize.

3.    Press the APPLICATIONS key. Then press R.

4.    Press the arrow key corresponding to the border of the frame you wish to move.

5.    Press the arrow key corresponding to the direction you wish to move the selected border.

For example, if you wish to bring the right border of the frame in (to make the frame smaller), first press RIGHT ARROW, then press LEFT ARROW to move the border of the frame. As you press arrow keys and the border moves, the distance in pixels is reported.

6.    Press INSERT+DOWN ARROW to hear what text is within the borders of the frame. This should assist you in verifying the frame is sized as you need it.

7.    Press ENTER when the frame border is positioned where you want it, or press ESC to cancel the operation.

Frame Viewer Toolbox

Frame Viewer includes a toolbox containing four buttons: Options, Frames List, Help and Close. The Help button opens the Introduction to Frames help topic, and closes Frame Viewer. The close button closes Frame Viewer. The Options and Frames List buttons are explained in the following sections.

Options

Select the Options button to open a context menu containing the following items:

Create New Frame: This item creates a new frame positioned on and sized to the control or window that was active when Frame Viewer was opened.

View Frames List: This item opens the Frames List dialog.

Save Changes: This item saves changes to all frames.

Exit Frame Viewer: This item closes Frame Viewer. If frame settings have been changed, but not saved, you are prompted to save your changes.

Status: This item opens a submenu from which you can disable all frames and enable them again.

Hide Titles: This item temporarily hides titles for all frames.

Frames List

The Frames list button opens a dialog that lists all frames for the application that was active when Frame Viewer was opened. This list provides an alternate means of working with your frames, and provides access to frames that are inactive. Frame Viewer does not display frames that are inactive, so the Frames List dialog is the only way to access and make modifications to inactive frames.

An inactive frame has Validation Rules set to check for conditions that are not met at the time Frame Viewer was opened. For example, if a frame is set to be active in the Options dialog within an application, but Frame Viewer is opened from the application's Settings dialog, the frame would be inactive.

The following commands are available from the list of Frames:

  ----------------------- ----------
  Description             Command
  Enable/Disable Frame    SPACEBAR
  Open Frame Properties   ALT+P
  Delete Frame            ALT+D
  Close Frames List       ALT+C
  Move to Frame           ALT+M
  ----------------------- ----------

Note:  You can only move to active frames, but you can modify the properties for any frame in the list.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Frame Properties

The Frame Properties Dialog is a multi-page dialog box. Use this dialog to modify general settings, validation rules, events, or to fine tune a frame's position and size.

To access the properties for a frame, press INSERT+F2 to open the Run JAWS Manager dialog. Select Frame Viewer from the list and press ENTER. TAB to the frame and press ALT+ENTER.

General Properties

Validation Rules Properties

Events Properties

Position Properties

General Properties

The General page of the Frame Properties dialog contains basic settings. Many of these settings contain the information entered when a frame is created. Use this page to modify those settings you feel you need to change after you have created your frame.

Frame Name: Lists the name you assigned when you created your frame.

Synopsis and Description: Lists information that is used in Keyboard Help, INSERT+1, when you press the keystroke assigned to your frame.

Prompts - Spoken, Brailled, Tutor: Lists information for frames used to provide prompt information for controls.

Keystroke: Lists the keystroke which activates the On Frame Key event for the frame, causing any assigned actions to take place. If you copy a frame from another version of JAWS, or from another computer running JAWS, you need to reassign this keystroke.

Priority: Sets the relative priority of frames. This is useful when you have multiple frames within the same area of an application as it allows you to determine which one takes precedence over the others. The lower the value, the higher the priority.

Validation Rules Properties

The Validation Rules page of the Frame Properties dialog contains a list of the rules used to determine when the frame is active. The rules compare information from your application with information specified when the frame was created. The order in which rules are listed is the order in which they are processed.

The list specifies if the rule is on or off, the type of rule, the comparison type, and the value being compared.

  ----------------------- ----------------
  Description             Command
  Create Rule             ALT+A
  Toggle Rule on/off      SPACEBAR
  Modify Rule             ALT+ENTER
  Move Rule up            ALT+UP ARROW
  Move Rule Down          ALT+DOWN ARROW
  Edit Comparison Value   F2
  ----------------------- ----------------

When you select to create or modify a rule, a series of dialogs prompts you through each of the settings for the rule. Select Next after choosing each setting, and select Finish when you have completed all the dialogs. For more information, refer to Validation Rules.

Events Properties

The Events page of the Frame Properties dialog contains a list of the frame events set for the current frame. Events specify what your frame does, and what system activity causes it to do it. Events are things that happen in the application. Actions are assigned to them in this dialog so they take place whenever the event occurs. The order in which events are listed is the order in which they take place.

  --------------------- ----------------
  Description           Command
  Create Event          F2
  Modify Event          ALT+ENTER
  toggle Event on/off   SPACEBAR
  Move Event Up         ALT+UP ARROW
  Move Event Down       ALT+DOWN ARROW
  --------------------- ----------------

When you select to create or modify an event, a series of dialogs prompts you through each of the settings for the event. Select Next after choosing each setting, and select Finish when you have completed all the dialogs. If you are assigning multiple actions to the same type of event, after completing the dialogs, TAB past the Finish button and select the Add Another Event button. You are returned to the Actions dialog where you can assign another action to the event. The Events Properties dialog lists an event for each action you assign, and they are in the order you added the actions.

For more information, refer to Frame Events.

Position Properties

Use the Position page of the Frame Properties dialog box to specify exactly where you want the frame. The fields in this dialog are automatically filled out when you create the frame, so use these fields to tweak the exact position of your frame.

The first group of radio buttons has two choices:

·         Distance from Left Side of Window

·         Distance from Right Side of Window

Press TAB to move to the Distance edit field. Specify the distance in pixels (measured either from the left or right side of the window as specified by the radio buttons).

Press TAB to move to the Width edit field. This field specifies the exact width of the frame in pixels. This field automatically updates as you change the distance of the frame from the left or right side of the window.

The second group of radio buttons is similar to the first. It also contains two choices:

·         Distance from Top of Window

·         Distance from Bottom of Window

This group of radio buttons also has an edit field for the exact distance from top or bottom, and there is an edit field to specify the height of the frame. Navigate these fields in the same way as the ones discussed above.

Use the third group of radio buttons to specify whether you want the frame to be relative to the window or the screen. As you switch between these two choices, the choices above change to be relative to the screen or window. For example, if you choose relative to screen, the choices above change to state the frame’s distance from the left of the screen, instead of distance from the left of the window.

We recommend you set your frames relative to the Window for most situations. If you transfer frame files to another computer using a different screen resolution, your frame is more likely to work if it is set relative to the Window. Additionally, frames are usually designed specifically for one window; therefore they should be relative to that window.

The Lock to DPI check box allows you to specify that a frame will only be active at the DPI (Dots Per Inch) setting at which it was created.

For more information on positioning frames, refer to:

Moving Frames

Resizing Frames

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Validation Rules

Validation Rules are the criteria used to determine when frames are active. These rules compare information within your application to information specified within the rule. To ensure a frame is active when it is supposed to be, ensure its Validation Rules are set for conditions that are met within the area of the application where you want to use the frame.

When you open Frame Viewer, only active frames are displayed. Validation Rules ensure your frames are only active where they are to be used. If your Validation Rules are too general, your frames will be active in too many places and may speak useless information. If your Validation Rules are too specific, your frames may not work when you need them.

There are three components of any Validation Rule:

Information Types: The types of information found in your applications that are used to determine if frames are active or inactive.

Comparison Types: The types of comparisons made between the information types found in your applications and the comparison values you specify.

Comparison Values: The values you specify that are compared with the information types found in your applications.

Information Types

Comparison Types

Comparison Values

Information Types

Validation Rules are based on types of information found in your application.

Window Title: Window titles are the text contained within the title bars of application windows or dialog boxes. Window titles can change within applications where files can be opened. For example, the title of the open document is displayed in the title bar of Microsoft Word. If you want a frame to be active within Word no matter which file you have opened, you need to take this into account when you set up a Validation Rule based on window titles.

Window Class: Window classes are programming level labels assigned to every control and window. To verify the window class for a control or window, move focus to it and press CTRL+INSERT+F1. The "Class" line reports the window class.
 Window classes usually do not change, so Validation Rules based on them usually work well. However, there are applications in which window classes are generated dynamically, and in these applications, the window class for a control or window can be different each time you reopen the application. Some applications also use different window classes from version to version.

Window Text: Window text is text that appears within a window. When you use this rule, JAWS searches the entire window for the text to determine if your frame is active.
 We recommend always using other Validation Rules with this one and giving them higher priority so frames are more quickly recognized as inactive within those areas of your application where they are not used.

Frame Text: Frame text is text that appears within the borders of the frame. When you use this rule, JAWS searches the text within the borders of the frame for the text to determine if your frame is active. We recommend taking the same precautions with this type of rule as with rules based on window text.

Comparison Types

Validation rules compare information from the current application or screen with information values you specify. You also specify the type of comparison the rule makes. The following comparison types are available.

Is: The value you specify must exactly match the information within the application for the rule to validate.

Is Not: The rule will validate unless there is an exact match between the value you specify and the information in the application.

Contains: The rule will validate if the information in the application contains the value you specify.

Does Not Contain: The rule will validate unless the information in the application contains the value you specify.

Comparison Values

Comparison values are specified in your Validation Rules and compared to the information types found in your applications. These comparisons are based on the comparison types you have specified.

When deciding on what values to specify for comparisons, it is important to consider the information type, the comparison type, and how your frame is to be used.

For example, in some dialogs in Microsoft Word 2000, all controls use the window class, "bosa_sdm_Microsoft Word 9.0." If the frame is only to be used in this version of Word, a window class based rule using the comparison value of Is would work fine with the full window class specified as the comparison value. However, if you wished to use the same frame in Word 97 as well, you need to be aware that the window class in that version of Word is slightly different. It is, "bosa_sdm_Microsoft Word 8.0." To make the frame work in both versions of Word, you need to do one of two things:

·         Add a second comparison value of "bosa_sdm_Microsoft Word 8.0" to the rule. The advantage of this is that you do not need to modify any other part of your rule. Both values are compared to the actual window class and if either of them match, the rule is validated.

·         Change the comparison type in the rule to Contains, and change the comparison value to "bosa_sdm_Microsoft Word" in the rule. Since both versions of Word use a window class that contains this information, the rule will validate.

Tip: To quickly change a comparison value, move to the Validation Rules page of a Frame's properties, select the rule in the list, and press F2. Type in the new value to be compared to the information in your application and press ENTER.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Frame Events

JAWS makes extensive use of events within Windows and your applications to determine when certain responses or actions are necessary. Events occur all the time: when you press a key on your keyboard (KeyPressedEvent), when you open a file containing text (NewTextEvent), when you TAB from one control to another (FocusChangeEvent). Recognizing events in such a way that actions can be taken allows JAWS to quickly and naturally respond appropriately as you work.

Within frames, only specific events are used. You specify which events each frame recognizes. When one of the events specified for a frame occurs, the action you have associated with that event is taken.

There are several parts to every event used with frames.

·         Frame Event Types: There are four types of frame events: On Focus, On Frame Key, On Play Action, and On Text. The event type determines what causes actions within your frame to take place. For example, if you want some specific action to take place whenever you TAB to a control within the borders of a frame, assign an On Focus event and associate the action to take place.

·         Event Actions: Event actions are the actions that occur when the event takes place. Each event you add activates only one action. If you want to have several things occur when focus moves into the borders of a frame, add the On Focus frame event several times, assigning different actions to each instance of the event.

·         Action Attributes: Many, but not all, event actions require that you specify an attribute of some sort. For example, if you set a frame to speak the contents of a window when some event occurs, when you assign the Say Window action to the frame event, you are prompted to specify which window is to be spoken.

Frame Event Types

Text Filters

Event Scope

Event Actions

Frame Event Types

The following events are available for use with frames.

On Focus

This event occurs whenever the system focus moves into the borders of a frame. If you want something to happen whenever you TAB to a specific control in a dialog, create a frame at the location of the control, assign the On Focus event, and add the actions you want to take place.

On Frame Key

This event occurs when the keyboard combination assigned to the frame is pressed. The keyboard assignment is made within the General page of the Frame Properties dialog.

On Play Action

This event occurs when the action, Play Frame Actions is used from another frame and uses this frame as the attribute.

For example, assume you want several actions to take place in FrameA, but only when an event occurs in FrameB. In FrameA, set up an On Play Action event for each action you want to take place. Then in FrameB, set up the event you want to use to initiate the actions. Assign the action, Play Frame Actions to this event, and set FrameA as the attribute.

With the On Play Action event, you can specify the scope of the event to determine when the event is recognized.

On Text

This event occurs when text is newly displayed within the borders of the frame. Newly displayed text can be text typed into an edit field, or static text in a dialog when the dialog first appears on the screen.

This text can be filtered so only specific text, or text with certain attributes or colors activates the event.

For example, if you set the On Text event for a frame containing a list box, and set the filter to recognize any highlighted text, every time you arrow to a new item in the list box, newly highlighted text is displayed and the event occurs, so the associated action takes place.

With the On Text event, you can specify the scope of the event to determine when the event is recognized.

Text Filters

When using the On Text event, you can specify that the event is recognized only if the text newly written within the borders of the frame matches a "filter" you set. This filter allows you to specify:

·         Foreground (Text) Color

·         Background Color

·         Text attributes (Bold, Highlight, Italic, Underline, etc.)

·         A String of Text

Foreground and background colors can be specified based on the text colors at the location of the JAWS cursor (where it was before Frame Viewer was started), by selecting the color names from the edit combo boxes, or by typing in the RGB (Red, Green, Blue) numeric values.

When you specify a string of text for the filter, for the text in the frame to be considered a match, it must be displayed all on one line, and it cannot be interrupted by other text, symbols, or graphics.

Event Scope

The On Play Action event and the On Text event can be set so these events are only recognized under certain conditions. This allows you to limit when the actions associated with these events occur.

Set these Events to be recognized:

·         All the time, regardless of the location of the system focus

·         Only when the system focus is within the frame

·         Only when the system focus is not within the frame

Event Actions

Actions are what make frames so powerful. Set actions to read the frame or window, play a sound file, reposition cursors, or run a JAWS script. Each event you add to your frame is associated with one action, but you can have several instances of the same event type with different actions associated with each, so when the event occurs, all the actions take place.

Note: Actions take place in the order the associated event types are listed in the Events page of the Frame Properties dialog.

When you add an event and choose an action to assign to it, as you move through the list of actions, a description of each action is provided. Below are summarized the types of actions that are available.

Speak or Braille Information

There are actions to speak or Braille the following types of information:

·         Text within a frame or window: You specify which frame or window.

·         Text with specific attributes in a frame or window: Specify the frame or window, and specify the attributes or colors of the text.

·         A string of text: Just specify what you want spoken or displayed in Braille.

·         A structured message: Specify a combination of specific text and information gathered through use of script functions.

Note: The actions related to Braille only work while you are in structured mode.

Move Cursors

There are actions to move cursors as follows:

·         Move the JAWS cursor to the top left corner of a frame

·         Move the JAWS cursor to the top left corner of a window

·         Move the JAWS cursor to the PC cursor

Play Sounds

There are actions to play sounds you specify, system sounds, or to produce a beep from the system speaker.

Other

There are also actions to:

·         Load JAWS Configuration Files: Specify the configuration files you wish to use.

·         Play Actions Specified in other Frames: An event occurring in one frame can be set to cause actions in another frame to take place.

·         Run JAWS Scripts: Enhance your frames even further by using them together with JAWS scripts.

·         Suppress Script Events: Prevent script events from causing information to be spoken or Brailed so as to avoid duplicating the information your frame is providing.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Frame Defaults

When you create a frame, several default settings are used for Validation Rules and Frame Events. It is helpful to be aware of these defaults if you need to change the rules under which a frame is active, or if you need to change the functionality of a frame.

Default Frame Events

When a frame is created, one frame event is always assigned, On Frame Key, set to speak the contents of the frame. This frame event is added even if you do not assign a keystroke to the frame.

The other frame events that are assigned depend on the options selected during creation of the frame.

The fifth page of the frame creation dialogs prompts you to specify how your frame will echo text newly displayed within the frame. The choice you select determines the other frame event that is added.

·         Silent: An On Text frame event is added with the action set to Suppress Script Event. This prevents the JAWS scripting New Text Event from causing text to be spoken.

·         Highlight: An On Text frame event is added set to filter for highlighted text only, with the action set to Speak Text Filter. This frame event speaks the text that caused the frame event to take place, in this case, the highlighted text.

·         All: An On Text frame event is added that does not filter for any specific sort of text, and with the action set to Speak Text Filter. In this case, all text within the frame is spoken any time new text is displayed within the frame.

·         JAWS Screen Echo: No frame event is added when this choice is selected, and the way JAWS echoes text newly displayed in the frame is determined by default JAWS screen echo settings.

For more information, please refer to Frame Events.

Default Validation Rules

When a frame is created, two default Validation Rules are added:

·         A rule is added based on the Window Title in the application. When you later use this frame, it is active if the window title in the application contains the same text as was present in the window title when the frame was created. If you create a frame in an application in which the name of the open document is reflected in the title bar, you will need to modify this rule or your frame will only be active when that document is open.

·         A rule is added based on the window class in the application window or control. When you later use this frame, it is active if the window class in the application window or control contains the same information as was present when the frame was created.

For more information, please refer to Validation Rules.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Troubleshooting Frames

Creating and configuring frames to do what you want is a series of fairly simple steps, but there are quite a few steps, and frames can do a lot. Some of the time, frames will not work, or they might not work the way you expect. This topic addresses several situations you might encounter when working with frames, and provides some tips for correcting the situation.

Tips are provided for the following situations:

·         When a frame is inactive where you want to use it

·         When a frame is active where you do not want to use it

·         When a frame does not perform the actions you set for it

·         When a frame performs actions more frequently than you expect

·         When information sent to a Braille display is not properly updated

·         When Braille Information is not Displayed

When a Frame is Inactive Where you Want to Use it

If your frame is inactive when you expected it to be available, or when you open Frame Viewer, first make sure you opened Frame Viewer from the location at which the frame was created. All frames are application specific. You cannot create frames in one application and use them in another.

If you open Frame Viewer and your frames are inactive, you cannot move to them.

1.    TAB to the Frames List button and press SPACEBAR.

2.    Move to the frame you wish to work with, and press ALT+P to open the frame's properties.

When you first create a frame, two Validation Rules are set. A rule is set for the window title to contain the text it did at the time the frame was created. A rule is also set for the window class to contain the text it did at the time the frame was created. Verify this information has not changed in the application, or turn off one of the rules. In the Validation Rules page of frame properties, select a rule in the list and press SPACEBAR to toggle it off or back on again.

Add another comparison value. The rule will be valid if one or the other of the values match the information in the application.

Change the comparison type to something less specific, for example, from Is to Contains. Shorten the comparison value so it only contains text that does not change.

When a Frame is Active Where you do not Want to Use it

If your frame is active in places where you do not want it speaking information or performing other actions, your validation rules are too general. Look at the window title (INSERT+T), window class (CTRL+INSERT+F1), or text within the area (or areas) where you wish to use the frame. Look for something unique to that area or those areas. Set up a validation rule for that unique information.

When a frame does not perform the actions you set for it

All frame actions are based on events. Make sure the event is occurring as you expect. There are only three events that directly cause actions to take place: focus moving into the area of the frame (On Focus), new text (of some type) being newly displayed within the area of the frame (On Text), or pressing an assigned keystroke (On Frame Key). The fourth event type (On Play Action) lets you set an action in one frame to occur when one of the other events takes place in another frame.

Create events to try and verify when events are occurring. Create an On Focus event with the action, Say String. Have it state, "Focus Event." Try a similar test with the On Text event. Try assigning the action to the On Frame Key event, assign a keystroke, and test it.

When a Frame Performs Actions More Frequently than you Expect

Not all actions take place because of the frame events you have set. Some actions are caused by system events and the JAWS script support. Most frequently, these actions are initiated by FocusChangeEvent, or NewTextEvent. To test to see if this is the cause of the situation, create an On Focus event in your frame with the action set to Suppress Script Event. If this does not resolve the situation, create an On Text event with the action set to Suppress Script Event.

The On Text event, when set to filter for any highlighted text, will perform the associated action each time the text that is highlighted changes - for example, when moving through a list box. Try changing the scope of the event to only when focus is in the frame, or to only when focus is not within the frame.

When Information Sent to a Braille Display is not Properly Updated

When you use any of the Braille related actions to send information to a Braille display, the display may not properly refresh when you move focus to another control or perform other actions in your application. To prevent this, ensure the Show Focus Control check box is checked. This check box is located in the Add/Modify Event dialogs, on the page that is displayed after one of the Braille actions is assigned.

When Braille Information is not Displayed

If you configure a frame to send information to a Braille display, but the information is not displayed, verify that you are using structured mode. The frame actions related to Braille do not work while you are using line mode as line mode is an actual representation of what is displayed on the screen. While using structured mode, you can set your frames to send the information you find useful to your Braille display.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Customizing List Views

A list view is an area in a window or dialog box that contains one or more items, such as files, folders, records, and so on. The list view usually contains multiple columns that display information about each item in the list. You can use the Customize List View feature to change how JAWS provides you with information about these columns and items. Using this feature, you can:

·         Change the order in which JAWS reads columns in the list view.

·         Tell JAWS not to speak certain columns or show them on your Braille display.

·         Choose a voice alias that JAWS uses when reading column headers.

·         Choose whether JAWS should speak column headers and/or display them in Braille.

·         Assign custom text to each column header that JAWS can speak and/or display in Braille.

Note: You cannot customize list views if the Rely On MSAA For Listviews check box is selected in the Miscellaneous group in Settings Center.

To begin customizing a list view, do the following:

1.    Start the program where the list view you want to customize is located.

2.    Move to the list view and press INSERT+F2.

3.    Select "Customize List View" and press ENTER. The Customize Column Headers dialog box appears.

For more information on using this dialog box, see Customize Column Headers Dialog. After you customize a list view, JAWS saves your settings and applies them each time you use that list view. You can define different custom settings for each list view.

To hear your customized settings, use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to select items in the list view. JAWS reads the contents of the selected row. To hear the contents of a specific column in the selected row, hold down CTRL+INSERT and press the number of the column you want to read. For example, to read the first column in the list view, press CTRL+INSERT+1.

Tip: If you have customized a list view so that certain columns are not spoken, you can press INSERT+PAGE UP to read the information in all columns for the selected item.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Customize Column Headers Dialog

The Customize Column Headers dialog box allows you to change how JAWS announces column headers using speech and Braille in a list view. These customizations are saved so you do not need to repeat your changes each time you use the list view.

To customize a list view, move the focus to it and then press INSERT+F2. Select "Customize List View" and press ENTER. The Customize Column Headers dialog box appears. Refer to the topics below for more information on using this dialog box.

Changing the Order of Columns

Toggling Speech and Braille for Columns

Selecting a Voice Alias for Column Headers

Assigning Custom Text to Columns

Changing the Order of Columns

JAWS reads the columns listed in the Customize Column Headers dialog box from top to bottom. To change the order in which JAWS announces the columns of a list view, do the following:

1.    On the Speech tab, use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to select a column.

2.    Use the Move Up and Move Down buttons to change the position of the column in the list. JAWS reads columns at the top of the list first.

3.    Press CTRL+TAB to switch to the Braille tab. The list on this tab shows the order in which JAWS displays columns in Braille.

4.    Use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to select a column from the list.

5.    Use the Move Up and Move Down buttons to change the position of the column in the list. JAWS displays columns at the top of the list in Braille first.

6.    Choose the OK button.

Toggling Speech and Braille for Columns

If you do not want JAWS to read a certain column and/or display it in Braille, do the following:

1.    On the Speech tab, use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to select the column.

2.    Choose the Toggle Speech button. This sets the behavior for the column to "Do Not Speak." You can choose this button again to change the behavior back to "Speak Column."

3.    Press CTRL+TAB to switch to the Braille tab and select the column from the list.

4.    Choose the Toggle Braille button. This sets the behavior for the column to "Do Not Braille." You can choose this button again to change the behavior back to "Braille Column."

5.    Choose the OK button.

Selecting a Voice Alias for Column Headers

To assign a voice alias to the titles of columns in a list view, do the following:

1.    Choose the Select Voice Alias button.

2.    Use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to select the voice alias that you want JAWS to use when reading column headings and/or custom text.

3.    Choose the OK button. The voice alias you selected is shown in the Data column.

4.    Choose the OK button.

Assigning Custom Text to Columns

You can have JAWS read or display in Braille custom text instead of, or in addition to, the column header text. To enter custom text and define how JAWS announces column headers, do the following:

1.    On the Speech tab, use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to select the column you want to assign custom text to.

2.    In the Custom Text edit box, type the text that you want JAWS to announce when reading the column. You can repeat steps 1 and 2 to assign different text to each column header.

3.    In the Column Headers area, select one of the following radio buttons:

o   Ignore - JAWS does not read column headers or custom text in list views.

o   Speak Custom Text OR Header - If you assigned custom text to a column, JAWS reads this text instead of the column header. If you have not assigned any custom text, JAWS reads the column header.

o   Speak Custom Text AND Header - JAWS reads the column header and any custom text that you have assigned.

o   Speak Custom Text Only - JAWS only reads custom text assigned to columns and does not read the column headers.

4.    If you want JAWS to display any custom text in Braille, press CTRL+TAB to switch to the Braille tab.

5.    Use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to select the column you want to assign custom text to.

6.    In the Custom Text edit box, type the text that you want JAWS to display in Braille when reading the column. You can repeat steps 5 and 6 to assign different text to each column header.

7.    In the Column Headers area, select one of the following radio buttons:

o   Ignore - JAWS does not display column headers or custom text in Braille.

o   Braille Custom Text OR Header - If you assigned custom text to a column, JAWS displays this text in Braille instead of the column header. If you have not assigned any custom text, JAWS displays the column header.

o   Braille Custom Text AND Header - JAWS displays the column header and any custom text that you have assigned.

o   Braille Custom Text Only - JAWS only displays custom text assigned to columns and does not display the column headers.

8.    Choose the OK button.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

 

Navigation Quick Key Manager

Navigation Quick Keys are single or combination keystrokes that let you move quickly around Web pages, Acrobat PDF files, Microsoft Word documents, or Microsoft Outlook e-mail messages. For example, if you press the letter H while visiting a Web page, JAWS jumps to and reads the next heading on the page. Likewise, if you press SHIFT+H, JAWS jumps to and reads the previous heading.

Use the Navigation Quick Key Manager to view current key assignments, edit key assignments, or delete key assignments.

Opening the Navigation Quick Key Manager

To open the Navigation Quick Key Manager, do one of the following:

·         Press INSERT+F2, N, and then ENTER.
 

·         From the JAWS application window, press ALT+U to open the Utilities menu, press N to jump to the Navigation Quick Key manager, and then press H to open HTML/PDF Keys, O to open Microsoft Outlook Keys, or W to open Microsoft Word Keys.

A list of all Navigation Quick Keys for Web pages and PDF documents, Outlook e-mail messages, or for Word documents appear in the open dialog box. Use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to scroll through the list.

Editing Key Assignments

You can assign an unused letter or number to an action listed in the Navigation Quick Key column of the dialog box.

To assign a key to an action, do the following:

1.    Press the UP or DOWN ARROW key to move to an action in the list.

2.    Press TAB to move to the Edit Key Assignment button and press SPACEBAR. The Edit Quick Navigation Key Assignment dialog box opens.

3.    In the Key Assignment combo box, press UP ARROW  or DOWN ARROW to scroll through the list of available letters and numbers that can be assigned to the action. Press ENTER after choosing an item from the list. The new key assignment now appears in the Assignment column of the Navigation Quick Key Manager dialog box.

4.    To save the change, move to the OK button in the Navigation Quick Key Manager dialog box, and press ENTER. The new assignment takes place immediately.

Deleting Key Assignments 

To remove a Navigation Quick Key from an action, do the following:

1.    Press the UP or DOWN ARROW key to move to an action in the list.

2.    Press TAB to move to the Delete Key Assignment button and press SPACEBAR. The word Unassigned appears next to the key action in the Navigation Quick Key Manager dialog box.

3.    To save the change, move to the OK button, and press ENTER. The change takes place immediately.

Refer to Navigation Quick Keys for a list of quick keys that you can use with Web pages and PDF documents.

Refer to Navigation Quick Keys in Word for a list of quick keys to use with Word documents.

 

 

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       | Next Section          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Remote Access

Remote access software, like Citrix and Remote Desktop, allows you to establish a connection from your computer (called the "client") to another computer (called the "server/remote computer"). Once connected, you can run programs and view files just as if you were sitting at the remote computer's keyboard. The remote computer handles all processing and data storage tasks. The client computer acts as an intermediary between you and the remote computer, relaying your commands and displaying the results.

Visually, users see a graphical representation of the remote computer's desktop on their client computer. However, the version of JAWS installed on the client cannot read or interact with this image. With JAWS remote access, you install a version of JAWS on the remote computer to provide speech and braille access to programs you use while in a remote session. The version of JAWS installed on the remote computer sends the output to the client through a virtual channel. The version of JAWS installed on the client computer then relays this output to the user through a synthesizer and/or braille display.

The Remote Access feature is available for licenses of JAWS Professional and JAWS Home that use Internet License Manager (ILM) or Dongle authorization. The Remote Access feature must be purchased separately. Contact Freedom Scientific Sales for more information.

Visit the Freedom Scientific website to view more detailed instructions on setting up and authorizing your software to work in a remote access environment.

 

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       | Next Section          |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

 

Contact and Sales Information

Corporate Headquarters

Freedom Scientific, Inc.
 17757 US Highway 19 N
 Suite 560
 Clearwater, FL 33764
 USA
 www.FreedomScientific.com
 

Telephone: (727) 803-8000

Fax: (727) 803-8001

Office hours: Monday through Friday 8:30 AM to 5:00 PM Eastern Standard Time (USA)

Technical Support Hours: Monday through Friday 8:30 AM to 7:00 PM Eastern Standard Time (USA)
 
 

Sales

Sales Telephone: (800) 444-4443

International Sales Telephone (including Canada): (727) 803-8000

Sales Fax: (727) 803-8001

Sales e-mail: info@FreedomScientific.com

To ensure that your request is handled promptly, include your complete address and telephone number.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Help Improve Freedom Scientific Products

As you use JAWS and Fusion, you have the option to allow us to collect anonymous usage information that is generated as you use the software for your daily tasks. This data helps us continue to make improvements as well as more easily locate and address problems. Collected data includes JAWS version, operating system version, language, country, as well as information on various JAWS settings such as the current synthesizer, braille display, and braille table.

If you choose to participate, no spoken or braille content is collected and no data is shared with any parties outside of Freedom Scientific. The data we collect strictly helps us better understand how our software is being used in the field so we can quickly make enhancements to features being used the most by our customers. If you choose not to participate, then no usage data is collected and transmitted.

You can change your selection at any time by doing the following:

1.    Press INSERT+6 on the number row to open Settings Center and press CTRL+SHIFT+D to load the default settings file.

2.    Navigate to Miscellaneous in the tree view and press RIGHT ARROW to expand the group.

3.    Use the SPACEBAR to select or clear the "Submit Anonymous Usage Data" check box.

4.    Press ENTER to save your change and close Settings Center.

You can also choose whether or not to participate in this program through the Startup Wizard located in the JAWS Help menu.

 

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

End User License Agreement – JAWS®

Last updated: February 18, 2019

IMPORTANT! BE SURE TO CAREFULLY READ AND UNDERSTAND ALL OF THE RIGHTS, OBLIGATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS SET FORTH IN THIS END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT (“EULA”). LICENSEE IS NOT AUTHORIZED TO USE THE JAWS PROGRAM, UNLESS AND UNTIL LICENSEE ACCEPTS THE TERMS OF THIS EULA.

BY AGREEING TO THE TERMS OF THIS EULA, USING, INSTALLING OR DOWNLOADING THE PROGRAM, LICENSEE SIGNIFIES ITS ACCEPTANCE OF AND INTENT TO BE BOUND BY THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS EULA. BY USING THE PROGRAM, LICENSEE ACKNOWLEDGES THAT LICENSEE HAS READ AND UNDERSTANDS THIS EULA, AND AGREES TO BE BOUND BY ALL OF ITS TERMS AND CONDITIONS. IF LICENSEE DOES NOT ACCEPT THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THIS EULA, THEN DO NOT USE, INSTALL OR DOWNLOAD THE PROGRAM.

This EULA is entered into between Freedom Scientific, Inc. a Delaware corporation, with an address at 17757 US Highway 19 N, Suite 560, Clearwater, Florida 33764, U.S.A. (referred to as "Licensor") and you (referred to as "Licensee") and shall be effective as of the date Licensee accepts the terms of this EULA by any of the means noted above (""Effective Date").

1. DEFINITIONS

1.1 "Activated"

means that an appropriate License key has been entered allowing the Program to fully operate.

1.2 "Computer"

means a computer, workstation, terminal or device.

1.3 "Documentation"

means the user guide, help information, content and/or other documentation and materials accompanying and associated with the Software, including associated media, printed materials and any online or electronic documentation provided by Licensor for use with the Software.

1.4 "Edition"

means the specific edition or mode of the Program licensed to or used by Licensee and covered by this EULA. There are seven (7) distinct editions or modes of the Program: Home, Home Annual, Student Annual, Professional, Student Edition, Limited Timed and 40-Minute Mode. Information identifying the applicable edition or mode is provided in the “About Box” under the Help section of the Software or otherwise in the documentation accompanying Licensee’s purchase of the License, or if applicable, in the Organizational License.

1.5 "End User"

means Licensee, as either an individual Licensee if licensing the Program directly, or as an employee or contractor who is authorized by an Organizational Licensee to use the Program.

1.6 "License"

means the license to use the Program as set forth in this EULA, in any applicable Organizational License, and in any document or confirmation issued, agreed or otherwise confirmed by Licensor that contains the specifics of the type of license to use the Program granted to Licensee.

1.7 "Ordering Document"

means any order confirmation, purchase order, online receipt, or other method under which an End User purchases a License.

1.8 "Organizational License"

means the separate software license agreement or other written understanding as may be entered into between Licensor and an Organizational Licensee, which provides for the licensing and use of the Program by the Organizational Licensee and its End Users.

1.9 "Organizational Licensee"

means any business entity, enterprise, organization or governmental institution that receives an Organizational License to the Program from Licensor, subject to each individual End User agreeing to a EULA governing their use of the Program. An Organizational Licensee shall be responsible and liable for any and all use of the Program by individual End Users receiving and using the Program under an Organizational License.

1.10 "Program"

means, collectively, the Software, Updates, all related Documentation, and any Upgrades provided under this EULA.

1.11 "Software"

means any computer program (in object code) of Licensor provided to and downloaded, installed or accessed by an End User pursuant to this EULA.

1.12 "Term"

means the term of the applicable License and as more particularly set forth for the applicable Edition in Section 2.2 below.

1.13 "Upgrade"

means any new version of the Software delivered to Licensee pursuant to this EULA or an Organizational License.

1.14 "Update"

means any patch, bug fix or any other update of the Software delivered to Licensee pursuant to this EULA or an Organizational License.

2. LICENSE TO THE PROGRAM

2.1 General Licensing Provisions and Grant of License.

Licensor provides Licensee with the Program Licensee has downloaded, received in a package with this EULA, or received by other authorized means, for Licensee’s use in accordance with the terms and conditions this EULA. If Licensee is an End User who is an employee or contractor of an Organizational Licensee, Licensee’s use of the Program will also be subject to the terms and conditions of the applicable Organizational License between Licensor and such Organizational Licensee. The terms and conditions applicable to End Users in the applicable Organizational License are incorporated by reference into this EULA. Subject to the terms and conditions in this EULA, and the provisions of Section 2.2 that apply to Licensee’s Edition, Licensor grants to Licensee a limited, nonexclusive, nontransferable, non-sublicensable license to use the Program as an End User for the applicable Term. All of the provisions of this EULA, except for Section 2.2, apply to all Licenses. Since Licensor makes the Program available in different Editions which are more fully described below in Section 2.2, only those provisions of Section 2.2 applicable to Licensee’s specific Edition will apply.

2.2 Licenses for Specific Editions.

Licensor further defines and limits the License granted in Section 2.1 for Licensee’s specific Edition as follows:

2.2.1 Home License.

The "Home License" is limited to use by a single End User only and is limited to Licensee’s personal and non-commercial use. While, under the Home License, the Program may be installed on more than one Computer and the License Activated on up to three Computers, use of the Program is limited to only one Computer at a time and not concurrently on more than one Computer or by more than one End User at a time. The Term of the Home License is perpetual unless otherwise stated in the License. Licensee will receive all Updates that Licensor makes generally commercially available during the Term of Licensee’s Home License. However, unless Licensee purchases a separate software maintenance agreement for the Program from Licensor as provided in Section 2.3, Licensee will not receive any Upgrades.

2.2.2 Home Annual License.

The "Home Annual License" is limited to use by a single End User only and is limited to Licensee’s personal and non-commercial use. While, under the Home Annual License, the Program may be installed on more than one Computer and the License Activated on up to three Computers, use of the Program is limited to only one Computer at a time and not concurrently on more than one Computer or by more than one End User at a time. The Term of the Home Annual License is the limited duration Term specified in an Ordering Document. Licensee will receive all Updates and Upgrades that Licensor makes generally commercially available during the Term of Licensee’s Home Annual License.

2.2.3 Student Annual License.

The “Student Annual License” is limited to use by a single End User only and is limited to use by a registered student, or a member of the faculty or staff on a Computer at a school, educational institution, or their home.  While, under the Student Annual License, the Program may be installed on more than one Computer, the License may be Activated and used on only one Computer at a time and not concurrently on more than one Computer or by more than one End User at a time. The Term of the Student Annual License is the limited duration Term specified in an Ordering Document.  Licensee will receive all Updates and Upgrades that Licensor makes generally commercially available during the Term of Licensee’s Student Annual License.

2.2.4 Professional License.

A. The "Professional License" is for use by a single End User, or by multiple End Users pursuant to the applicable Organizational License.

B. If Licensee is an individual, while the Program may be installed on more than one Computer and the License Activated on up to three Computers, use of the Program is limited to only one Computer at a time and not concurrently on more than one Computer or by more than one End User at a time. Licensee is permitted to use the Program on Licensee’s own Computer or a Computer of Licensee’s employer, but only for Licensee’s own personal use or for the internal business use of Licensee’s employer. Unless otherwise stated in the License, the Term of a Professional License owned by an individual Licensee is perpetual.

C. If Licensee is using the Program as an employee or consultant of an Organizational Licensee, then Licensee may only use the Program for the commercial purposes of the business of the Organizational Licensee that licensed the Program, and only on a Computer owned or provided by the Organizational Licensee. No Professional License of an Organizational Licensee may be transferred to an individual. Unless otherwise stated in the Organizational License, the Term of a Professional License owned by an Organizational Licensee is perpetual.

D. Access to the Program for a Professional License purchased for multiple End Users is subject to the following additional limitations unless provided otherwise in the Organizational License:

(i) access may be provided for individual End Users through individual, stand-alone keys to be input into an individual Computer, and an End User’s use of the Program is limited to one Computer at a time; or alternatively

(ii) access to the Program may be provided via an internal network or storage device (such as a network server) and the Program can be used and deployed only on the identified server of the Organizational Licensee, so long as the number of End Users of the Program does not exceed the number of users for which license rights to use the Program have been acquired and dedicated by the Organizational Licensee.

Licensee’s rights as an individual End User under (i) or (ii) above immediately terminate when End User’s employment or contract with the Organizational Licensee ends, or the License is otherwise terminated by the Organizational Licensee or as provided in this EULA.

E. Unless otherwise agreed in an Organizational License, during the Term of the Professional License: (i) Licensee (and Licensee’s permitted End Users) will receive all Updates that Licensor makes generally commercially available, but (ii) Licensee will not receive any Upgrades unless Licensee purchases a separate software maintenance agreement for the Program from Licensor as provided in Section 2.3.

2.2.5 Student Edition License.

Unless otherwise stated in the applicable Organizational License, the Student Edition License is effective for a term of three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the Effective Date, and use of the Program under a Student Edition License is restricted to use by a registered student, or a member of the faculty or staff on a Computer at a school, educational institution, or their home. While, under the Student Edition License, the Program may be installed on more than one Computer and the License Activated on up to three Computers, use of the Program is limited to only one Computer at a time and not concurrently on more than one Computer or by more than one End User at a time.    Licensee will receive all Updates and Upgrades that Licensor makes generally commercially available during the Term of Licensee’s Student Edition License.

2.2.6 Limited Timed License.

Unless otherwise specified in an Organizational License, the Limited Timed License is effective for a Term of ninety (90) days from the Effective Date. Licensee may use the Limited Timed License for testing or for limited duration use, or as otherwise agreed with Licensor. While, under the Limited Time License, the Program may be installed on more than one Computer and the License Activated on up to three Computers, use of the Program is limited to only one Computer at a time and not concurrently on more than one Computer or by more than one End User at a time. Licensee will receive all Updates and Upgrades that Licensor makes generally commercially available during the Term of Licensee’s Limited Timed License.

2.2.7 40-Minute Mode.

The 40 Minute Mode is provided as a limited time duration license mode of the Program, which can be used to get started during the installation process of the Program or for a limited demonstration of how the Program works. The Program in 40 Minute Mode has a Term limited to forty (40) minutes in duration. Every Program that does not have an active license to use the Program (including, for example, after expiration of the Term of the License) or an associated key will operate in this 40 Minute Mode. The 40 Minute Mode is not intended for commercial use other than use while waiting for an active license to use the Program or an associated key to arrive or be installed. The 40 Minute Mode also provides emergency access to a Computer for an End User when an active license to use the Program or a key is not present or associated with a Computer. If the Program reverts to the 40 Minute Mode, an active license (or key) is required to return the Program to full capability.

2.3 Upgrades.

For Home and Professional Licenses, Licensor may from time to time and for a fee offer Licensee the option to receive an Upgrade. Depending on which option Licensee elects to purchase, Licensee will be entitled to receive an Upgrade consisting of either a single new version (i.e. the next version of the Software after the version of the Software originally licensed to Licensee under this EULA), or the next two new versions (i.e. the next two sequential versions of the Software after the version of the Software originally licensed to Licensee under this EULA). The Upgrade options may be varied by Licensor from-time-to-time. If and when Licensee accepts any Upgrade, the Upgrade will be considered part of the Software and Licensee’s use of the Upgrade will be subject to the terms and conditions of this EULA or any agreement that supersedes this EULA and which governs the use of such Upgrade. If Licensee does not agree to be bound by such superseding agreement, Licensee may not use the Upgrade, and in the event that Licensee is then currently using or has used any Upgrade without agreeing to any superseding agreement, Licensee must cease such use and remove the Upgrade from Licensee’s Computer and all Licenses to the Upgrade will be considered terminated. Licensor reserves the right to discontinue support for all versions of the Software other than the then-current released version or updated Software. To be eligible to use any Software identified as an Upgrade, Licensee must be first licensed and current in Licensee’s License for the Software eligible for the Upgrade.

2.4 Rights Reserved.

All rights to the Program not expressly granted to Licensee in this EULA are reserved by Licensor. All trademarks included in the Program or used with the Program, including without limitation JAWS®, are the property of Licensor. Any use of such marks shall inure to the benefit of Licensor.

2.5 License and Not Sale.

The Program is being provided by a non-exclusive license and not as a sale of the Program. Licensee should understand that it does not own the Program. Licensee is only licensed to use the Program for the Term of the applicable License. By virtue of the License, Licensee does not obtain or possess any ownership in the Program or any related copyright or other intellectual property rights in the Program.

2.6 Payment of License Fees.

Licensee’s use of the Program is subject to payment of any License fee or renewal fee (if applicable) for any subsequent Term, or Organizational License’s payment of a License fee or renewal fee for an Organizational License under which Licensee is an End User. Except as otherwise set forth in any applicable Organizational License, Licensor may change any fee for a renewal Term in its sole discretion. To maintain the License under this EULA, Licensee (or the Organizational Licensee responsible for payment of the applicable License fee) must timely pay any applicable License fee or renewal fee. Except as otherwise set forth in any applicable Organizational License, failure to pay any such applicable fee shall be grounds for termination of the License by Licensor without any notice required, and Licensee agrees that failure to timely pay the applicable License fee or renewal fee will result in termination of the License.

3. CHOOSING NOT TO ACCEPT THE LICENSE AGREEMENT

If Licensee chooses to not accept the terms of this EULA, then (i) if Licensee received a packaged copy of the Program, Licensee must promptly return the Program, or (ii) if Licensee received a copy of the Program as an electronic download, Licensee must promptly remove the Program (including the Software, and all related Documentation) from Licensee’s Computer, network or other device on which the Program is saved, stored or copied. For copies of the Program obtained in a physical package, if Licensee does not accept the Program, the following items must be returned to Licensor: the Software, all Documentation that may have been included with the Software, and the receipt Licensee received when Licensee purchased the Program. Licensor will refund to Licensee the amount of money Licensee actually paid for the Program, minus shipping/handling fees if Licensee meets the above conditions.

4. THE PROGRAM

4.1 Use of the Program.

Licensee assumes sole responsibility for determining the appropriateness of the Program for achieving Licensee’s intended results. Licensee further assumes sole responsibility and all risk for the installation and use of the Program, and all data and results obtained from such installation and use of the Program. Licensee assumes complete responsibility for the selection, installation, use, and placement of hardware with which Licensee uses the Program. Licensor does not warrant that the Program is suitable for Licensee’s particular purpose or use. Nothing in this EULA shall prevent Licensee from using the Program in any disaster recovery and/or preproduction environment or process. Licensee may, from time to time, copy and use the Program for purposes of archival or emergency backup, including, but not limited to the testing and operation of disaster recovery plans or other similar contingencies. These copies and the original Program may be stored in the possession of another person, so long as the storage does not result in the Program being used in violation of these terms. Licensee’s use of the Program as an End User must be consistent with these installation and use requirements.

4.2 Restrictions on Use of the Program.

Licensee may not use the Program for any purpose other than those expressly set forth in this EULA. Licensee may not, in whole or part: alter, modify, decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, rent, lease, loan or sublicense the Program; create derivative works from the Program; or, except as expressly permitted in this EULA or any applicable Organizational License, copy, reproduce, duplicate, transfer, distribute or provide others with the Program. Licensee also may not allow the Program to be transmitted or communicated over a network except as specifically permitted in this EULA or in an Organizational License. Licensee may not operate or provide the Program as a service bureau. In the event Licensee copies, transfers, decompiles, disassembles, or reverse engineers the Program or creates a derivative work for another person in any form, except as is specifically authorized, then Licensee’s License to use the Program shall be automatically terminated.

4.3 Ownership of Intellectual Property.

Licensor represents and warrants that (i) it owns all right, title, and ownership of the copyrights, and other intellectual property rights in and to the Program, and (ii) it has all of the rights and licenses in any third party intellectual property embodied in the Program necessary to grant the rights to Licensee under this EULA. Licensor further represents and warrants that the Program does not and will not infringe the intellectual property rights of any third party and Licensor will indemnify, defend and hold Licensee harmless, notwithstanding any limit of liability, based on or arising out of any claim or threatened claim that the Program or any part or use thereof infringes or violates any patent, copyright, trademark, trade secret, license or other property or proprietary right of any third party; provided that Licensee notifies Licensor in writing within thirty (30) days of the claim, Licensor has sole control over the defense and all negotiations for a settlement or compromise, and Licensor receives reasonable assistance from Licensee necessary to perform Licensor’s obligations hereunder. The foregoing indemnity shall not apply with respect to the Program, or portions or components thereof: (i) not provided by Licensor; (ii) used in a manner not expressly authorized by this EULA or any Organizational License; (iii) if the alleged infringement or misappropriation results from any customizations, modifications, alterations or changes to the Program not developed or provided by Licensor; or (iv) combined with other products or services not provided by Licensor where the alleged infringement would not exist but for such combination. In the event that the Program is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to constitute an infringement or the use of the Program is enjoined (or Licensor reasonably believes that any of the foregoing are reasonably likely to occur), Licensor may, at its option: (i) procure for Licensee the right to continue to use the Program; (ii) provide an Upgrade so that use of the Program becomes non-infringing; or (iii) replace the Program with software that is substantially similar in functionality and performance. The Program is protected by U.S. and international copyright laws and treaties. Except as may be expressly stated herein, this EULA does not grant to Licensee any rights to the Program (or accompanying Documentation) or any rights to use the Documentation apart from the Software. Whenever the Program (including Documentation) is reproduced, then the copyright notice must also be reproduced and displayed in its original or substantially original form.

4.4 Viruses.

Licensor shall ensure that the Program does not contain any “back door,” “time bomb,” “Trojan horse,” “worm,” “drop dead device,” “virus”, “preventative routines,” “disabling code,” “cookie” or other computer software routines or programming devices designed to (i) permit unauthorized persons to access the Program, (ii) intentionally disable, modify, destroy or damage the Program, and/or (iii) make the Program inaccessible or delayed.

5. TERM AND TERMINATION

5.1 Term.

This EULA shall be effective from the Effective Date and extend for the Term of the applicable License for the Home License, Home Annual License, Student Annual License, Professional License, Student Edition License, Limited Timed License or 40-Minute Mode, or until otherwise terminated, and this EULA shall immediately terminate concurrently with the termination of any Organizational License in connection with which the License in this EULA is granted to Licensee.

5.2 Renewal.

Limited duration Licenses provided for in Section 2.2 will automatically terminate at the end of the initial Term (and any subsequent term), unless renewed pursuant to Licensor’s then-current renewal requirements or as may be provided for in an Organizational License, including payment of all fees applicable to any renewal period. For limited duration Licenses, to keep Licensee’s License in force, Licensee must timely pay the renewal fee, and failure to pay any required renewal fee, or any other required fee, shall be grounds for termination of the License by Licensor without notice.

5.3 Termination by End User.

Licensee may terminate the License at any time by removing or destroying all copies of the Program (including all copies of the Documentation), regardless of the form from Licensee’s Computer or device, or otherwise in Licensee’s possession or control.

5.4 Termination for Cause.

Except as otherwise provided in an Organizational License, Licensee’s License to the Program and this EULA will automatically terminate under any of the following: (i) if Licensee breaches or fails to comply with any of the terms of this EULA; (ii) if Licensee removes from Licensee’s Computer(s) and destroy all copies of the Program in Licensee’s possession or under its control; or (iii) if Licensee’s License Term ends, terminates or lapses including for failure to pay any renewal fee or pay any other applicable fee to extend or otherwise continue the Term of the License. For clarification under (i) above, this License is immediately terminated in the event the Licensee fails to comply with any term or condition of this EULA, whether or not Licensor has knowledge of the failure to comply.

5.5 Requirements upon Termination.

Upon termination of this EULA, Licensee is required to immediately cease use of the Program and destroy, delete or remove all copies of the Program from Licensee’s Computer(s). Licensee agrees to destroy, delete and remove all copies of the Program (including all Documentation) regardless of form, at such time this EULA is terminated.

6. LIMITED WARRANTY

6.1 LIMITED WARRANTY.

LICENSOR WARRANTS THAT WHEN DELIVERED TO LICENSEE AND FOR NINETY (90) DAYS THEREAFTER, THAT THE SOFTWARE (EXCLUDING UPDATES FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION 6.1) WILL CONFORM IN ALL MATERIAL RESPECTS TO LICENSOR’S THEN-CURRENT DOCUMENTATION FOR THE SOFTWARE. IN THE EVENT OF ANY CLAIM BY LICENSEE UNDER THIS LIMITED WARRANTY, LICENSEE MUST NOTIFY LICENSOR IN WRITING DESCRIBING IN REASONABLE DETAIL THE NATURE OF THE NONCONFORMITY, AND PROVIDE TO LICENSOR SUFFICIENT DETAIL TO ALLOW LICENSOR TO REPRODUCE THE PROBLEM. THE LIMITED WARRANTY CONTAINED IN THIS SECTION 6.1 WILL NOT APPLY IF, AND TO THE EXTENT THAT: (I) THE SOFTWARE IS NOT USED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THIS EULA OR THE DOCUMENTATION; (II) THE SOFTWARE OR ANY PART THEREOF HAS BEEN CUSTOMIZED, MODIFIED, ALTERED OR CHANGED BY ANYONE OTHER THAN LICENSOR; OR (III) A MALFUNCTION IN THE SOFTWARE HAS BEEN CAUSED BY ANY OF LICENSEE’S EQUIPMENT OR ANY THIRD-PARTY SOFTWARE.

6.2 AS-IS AND DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTIES.

EXCEPT FOR THE EXPRESS LIMITED WARRANTY IN SECTION 6.1 AND TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT ALLOWABLE BY LAW, LICENSOR PROVIDES THE PROGRAM TO LICENSEE “AS IS” AND WITH ALL FAULTS, MAKES NO OTHER WARRANTIES RELATED TO THE PROGRAM OR THE RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USE OF THE PROGRAM, AND PROVIDES THE PROGRAM WITHOUT ANY OTHER WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. LICENSOR DOES NOT WARRANT, AND LICENSEE HEREBY WAIVES ANY WARRANTY, THAT USE OF OR ACCESS TO THE PROGRAM BY LICENSEE AS AN END USER WILL BE ERROR FREE. LICENSOR DOES NOT WARRANT THAT THE FUNCTIONS CONTAINED IN THE PROGRAM WILL MEET LICENSEE’S REQUIREMENTS.

6.3 OTHER LIMITATIONS.

LICENSOR MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES (AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES) WITH RESPECT TO ANY HARDWARE, SOFTWARE, DATA OR INFORMATION NOT SUPPLIED BY LICENSOR, ANY INFORMATION, DATA, FORMULAS OR ALGORITHMS USED, ACCESSED BY OR INCORPORATED INTO THE PROGRAM, OR ABOUT ANY DEFECTS RELATED TO DOWNLOAD OR INTERNET CONNECTIVITY PROBLEMS DURING DOWNLOAD OF THE PROGRAM.

6.4 Use at Licensee’s Sole Risk.

Licensee as an End User hereby acknowledges and agrees that use of the Program shall be at Licensee’s sole and exclusive risk and subject to all applicable rules, regulations and applicable laws. Licensee hereby acknowledges that the Program may contain errors, inaccuracies and omissions. Licensee assumes any and all risks as to the results and performance of the Program, including any risk, damage, loss or harm from Licensee’s use or downloading the Program.

6.5 Inapplicability of Exclusions.

As the exclusion of implied warranties is not permitted by some states or jurisdictions, the above exclusions may not apply to Licensee. In that case, any implied warranties are limited in duration to ninety (90) days from the earlier date of download or activation of the License.

7. LIMITATION OF REMEDIES

7.1 EXCLUSIVE REMEDY.

EXCEPT FOR ITS INDEMNIFICATION OBLIGATIONS UNDER THIS EULA, LICENSOR’S ENTIRE LIABILITY AND THE LICENSEE’S EXCLUSIVE REMEDY UNDER THE LIMITED WARRANTY DURING THE WARRANTY PERIOD SHALL BE THAT LICENSOR, AT ITS SOLE OPTION, WILL EITHER REPAIR OR REPLACE THE PROGRAM NOT MEETING LICENSOR’S LIMITED WARRANTY, OR ALLOW FOR FURTHER DOWNLOAD OR UPGRADE OF THE PROGRAM.

7.2 LIMITATION OF DAMAGES.

TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, REGARDLESS OF WHETHER ANY REMEDY SET FORTH HEREIN FAILS IN ITS ESSENTIAL PURPOSE, IN NO EVENT WILL EITHER PARTY BE LIABLE TO THE OTHER PARTY FOR ANY CONSEQUENTIAL, INCIDENTAL, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, PUNITIVE OR OTHER DAMAGES WHATSOEVER (INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, DAMAGES FOR LOSS OF BUSINESS PROFITS OR INFORMATION, BUSINESS INTERRUPTION, OR ANY OTHER PECUNIARY LOSS), ARISING OUT OF OR IN ANY WAY RELATED TO THEIR RESPECTIVE OBLIGATIONS UNDER THIS EULA AND WHETHER BASED ON CONTRACT, TORT, NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY OR OTHERWISE, EVEN IF SUCH PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES. EXCEPT FOR ITS INDEMNIFICATION OBLIGATIONS UNDER THIS EULA, THE ENTIRE LIABILITY OF LICENSOR FOR ANY DAMAGES UNDER ANY PROVISION OF THIS EULA SHALL BE LIMITED TO THE ACTUAL FEES PAID TO LICENSOR BY OR ON BEHALF OF LICENSEE FOR THE SINGLE LICENSE EXPRESSLY COVERED BY THIS EULA.

7.3 Inapplicability.

As the exclusive remedy and limitation of damages may not be permitted by some states or jurisdictions, the provisions of Sections 7.1 and 7.2 may not apply to Licensee.

8. INDEMNIFICATION

To the maximum extent permitted under applicable law, Licensee agrees to indemnify and hold Licensor and its affiliates and subsidiaries, and their respective officers, directors, employees, agents, representatives, successors, assigns, service providers and suppliers harmless from any and all claims, losses, demands, fines, penalties, costs, and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and court costs, made by any third party in connection with or arising out of: (i) any bodily injury (including death) or damage to real property or tangible personal property caused by Licensee; (ii) Licensee’s breach or violation of any provision of this EULA or any applicable Organizational License; and (iii) Licensee’s violation of applicable laws or any rights of another person or entity. Licensee shall be responsible for any acts and omissions of its End Users in connection with its obligation under this EULA.

9. OTHER PROVISIONS

9.1 Restrictions on Assignment and Transfer.

Except as permitted herein, Licensee may not sublicense, assign, or transfer this License or EULA to another party, and any attempt to sublicense, assign or transfer any of the rights, duties or obligations under this EULA shall be null and void and without any legal effect. Nothing in this Section shall prevent an Organizational Licensee from transferring or assigning this EULA in connection with any merger or consolidation of the Organizational Licensee, or a sale of all or substantially all of the assets of the Organizational Licensee.

9.2 Consent to Use of Information.

Information privacy is very important to Licensor, and by using the Program Licensee agrees that the collection, use, and disclosure of any information Licensee provides to Licensor will be in accordance with Licensor’s Privacy Policy available at http://www.freedomscientific.com/About/Index/PrivacyPolicy.

9.3 Governing Law, Jurisdiction and Venue.

This EULA shall be governed, interpreted, construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida, U.S.A. The parties agree that the sole and exclusive venue and jurisdiction for filing and maintaining any lawsuit or other action or proceeding related to this EULA shall be in the state or federal courts sitting in Pinellas County, Florida, U.S.A. Each party, by entering into this EULA, consents and submits itself to the personal jurisdiction of such court. The parties agree that no Uniform Computer Information Transactions Act or similar provision from any state or other jurisdiction shall apply to this EULA.

9.4 Export Restrictions.

Licensee may not export, ship, transmit or re-export the Program in violation of any applicable law or regulation, including but not limited to, Export Administration Regulations issued by the U.S. Department of Commerce. Unless in compliance with applicable law and specifically authorized in writing by Licensor, Licensee shall not export the Program under any circumstances whatsoever. In any case, Licensee will indemnify and hold Licensor harmless from any and all claims, losses, liabilities, damages, fines, penalties, costs and expenses (including reasonable attorney’s fees) arising from, or relating to, any breach by Licensee of Licensee’s obligations under this section.

9.5 Waiver.

No failure or delay by either party in exercising any right, power or privilege hereunder shall operate as a waiver thereof, nor shall any single or partial exercise thereof preclude any other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right, power or privilege hereunder.

9.6 Severability.

In the event that any one or more of the provisions of this EULA are held to be invalid or otherwise unenforceable, the enforceability of the remaining provisions shall be unimpaired and enforced to the full extent permitted by law.

9.7 Injunctive Relief.

To the extent permitted under applicable law, the parties agree that in the event of a breach by either party of any provision of this EULA, the non-breaching party shall be entitled to seek and obtain injunctive or other equitable relief, or both, in each case without the requirement to post any bond or other form of security, and without such act constituting an election of remedies or disentitling the non-breaching party to each and every remedy available at law or in equity for a breach of this EULA by the other party.

9.8 Entire Agreement.

Except to the extent governed by an Organizational License, this EULA constitutes the entire agreement between Licensee and Licensor related to the Program and supersedes all prior or contemporaneous agreements, proposals, negotiations, representations and communications between Licensee and Licensor related to the Program. Licensee acknowledges that Licensee has not been induced to enter into this EULA by any representations or promises not specifically stated herein.

9.9 Statutory Exceptions for Public Institutions.

If Licensee is government or public agency, instrumentality or institution, including without limitation a public educational, research or medical institution or body, and any terms in this EULA (including by way of example, all or part of the termination, limitation of liability, exclusive remedies, limited warranty, indemnification and injunctive relief sections) are invalid or unenforceable against Licensee because of applicable law, then those terms will be deemed excluded and unenforceable (as the case may be), and instead construed in a manner most consistent with applicable governing law. In addition, if the applicable governing law for this EULA set forth in Section 9.3 is precluded for Licensee under applicable law, then this EULA will be governed and construed under the laws of the country, state, province or other jurisdiction in which Licensee’s primary office is located.

If Licensee has questions concerning this EULA, please contact Licensor for clarification at 17757 US Hwy 19 North – Suite 560, Clearwater, FL 33764, or phone (727) 803-8000.

 

  ------ --- --------------
  Back       Next Section
  ------ --- --------------

 

Technical Support

Contacting Freedom Scientific Technical Support

You must be a registered user to access Freedom Scientific support services. Freedom Scientific support services are subject to Freedom Scientific terms and conditions in place at the time the service is used.

Reach Technical Support using the following options:

·         Visit our Web site for automated online Help: Technical Support Department

·         Technical Support e-mail: Support at FreedomScientific.com

·         Technical Support Telephone: (727) 803-8600

When you call, be at your computer, have your documentation in hand, and be prepared to provide the following information:

·         Product serial number used for registration.

·         Product name and version number.

·         Type of computer hardware you are using.

·         Software version number of Windows.

·         Exact wording of any messages that appear on your screen.

·         What you were doing when the problem occurred.

·         How you tried to solve the problem.

Office hours: Monday through Friday 8:30 A.M. to 7:00 P.M. Eastern Time (USA)

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Error Reporting

The JAWS error reporting feature allows you to send information over the Internet to Freedom Scientific about any JAWS errors. If JAWS unexpectedly closes, a memory dump file, containing diagnostic information, is created in the JAWS user settings folder. If you also experience any issues where JAWS appears to still be running, but you have lost speech or braille, you can press INSERT+WINDOWS Key+F4 to manually close JAWS, terminate all related processes, and create a memory dump file.

After the memory dump file has been created, JAWS automatically restarts and displays the Error Reporting dialog box indicating that an error was detected and asking if you want to send this information to Freedom Scientific.

Choose one of the following and then the Send button to transmit the error report directly to Freedom Scientific.

·         Ask me if I want to send error reports to Freedom Scientific each time: The Error Reporting dialog box displays each time an error is detected. This is the default setting.

·         Send all error reports to Freedom Scientific without asking: Future error reports are automatically sent to Freedom Scientific without displaying a dialog box.

·         Never send error reports to Freedom Scientific: Any future error reports are not sent to Freedom Scientific and you are not prompted to send an error report.

JAWS will display a message to indicate that the report was sent successfully. If there was a problem sending the report, for instance, you do not have an active Internet connection, you are asked if you want to try sending it again. Choose Yes or No. Choose Don't Send if you do not wish to send the error report to Freedom Scientific. Choosing to send any error reports helps Freedom Scientific to continue to improve JAWS.

The information transmitted to Freedom Scientific is limited to the memory dump file as well as generic information allowing Freedom Scientific to investigate the source of the issue, such as your product version number, the date and time the error occurred, number of times your system has experienced an error, and the error code related to the problem. The only information related to your specific environment that is transmitted is your computer’s MAC address to find trends on a particular system. However, there is no way for us to map MAC addresses to any particular individual, and no personal identification information is transmitted.

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

Troubleshooting Firewall Software

Firewalls protect computer systems from being accessed by unauthorized users. Some network or personal firewall software may interfere with the installation, activation, or usage of JAWS. The following information will help you reconfigure your firewall to work with JAWS. Refer to your firewall software documentation for more information on allowing access for programs and files.

Note: Hardware firewalls do not interfere with installing, activating, or running JAWS.

Firewall Interferes with Installation

If your firewall software is preventing you from installing JAWS on your computer, reconfigure the firewall to allow the file Setup.exe to run. Then retry the installation procedure.

Firewall Interferes with Activation

If your firewall software prevents you from activating JAWS using the Internet, reconfigure the firewall to allow the following files to run: FSActivate.exe, CAUtil.exe, and CAUtil.enu. Once you have reconfigured your firewall, retry the activation process. If you cannot reconfigure the firewall, or if you still cannot activate JAWS, go to www.FSActivate.com. Follow the instructions on the Web page to retrieve an Activation License code and activate your software. For more information on using www.FSActivate.com, see Activating through a Trusted Third Party.

Firewall Interferes with Using JAWS

If the firewall software prevents JAWS from running or starting, or displays a warning message, reconfigure the firewall to allow the file JFW.exe to run. If the firewall is preventing speech, quit JAWS by pressing ALT+F4 and then do the following:

1.    Press and hold INSERT.

2.    While holding down INSERT, start JAWS.

3.    JAWS starts in 40 minute mode and provides speech access so you can navigate your firewall program.

4.    Reconfigure your firewall to allow the file JFW.exe to run.

5.    Quit and then restart JAWS.

Advanced Troubleshooting Information

For a complete list of all files that need to be allowed by your firewall software, including the connection type, incoming port, and outgoing port, refer to Advanced Troubleshooting.

 

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Network Authorization Instructions

This topic describes the steps necessary to set up your network license server environment using our generic network authorization tool. This tool lets you manage licenses for all of our ILM-based software products, and replaces the former product-specific network license server tools.

Network Server Installation and Activation

Note: You can only install the license server on a computer running Microsoft Windows. Other operating systems are not supported.

1.    Go to FSActivate.com/network and download the Network Authorization Tool installation file on the computer that will run the license server.

2.    Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation of the network authorization tools and license server.

3.    Once the license server is installed, open the Start menu, navigate to the Freedom Scientific Network Authorization Utilities folder, and then choose Update Network Authorization.

4.    Follow the prompts to complete the activation process for your software product.

Note: To activate a license on a computer that does not have direct Internet access, choose the Manual option and then follow the prompts to retrieve and enter a license code.

If you experience problems activating your network license server, you may have problems connecting to the Internet due to a firewall or other similar situations. Refer to our Software Activation Troubleshooting Guide for more information.

Client Computer Installation and Activation

After installing and activating a network license server, you are ready to install and run the application software on your client computers. Other than installing the application on each client computer, you do not need to perform any additional action. Each time the application software is started on a client computer, it will automatically search for the license server and obtain an authorization token.

The number of client computers that can be authorized at any given time depends on the number of users permitted by your license. For example, if you purchased a license for five users, your license server will allow five client computers to authorize. Once all tokens are assigned, no additional clients can receive authorization.

If you need to support additional users, contact your local distributor or Freedom Scientific to purchase additional seats.

Note: For client computers to obtain an authorization from the network license server they must both be on the same subnet. In situations where the client computer is on a different subnet, you must provide the application software the name or IP address of the network license server using the LSHOST or LSFORCEHOST environment variables. Refer to Chapter 2 – Configuring the License Server in the Sentinel License Manager System Administrator’s Guide available from fsactivate.com/network.

 

  ------ ---
  Back    
  ------ ---

Skim Reading Dialog

Press SHIFT+CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW or choose "Skim Reading Tool" in the List of JAWS Managers (INSERT+F2) to display the Skim Reading dialog box. Use this dialog box to define how you want JAWS to skim through the current document. You can choose to read either the first sentence or line of each paragraph. Alternatively, you can create text rules to search for lines, sentences, or paragraphs that contain specific words or phrases. The options available in the Skim Reading dialog box are described below.

When you press CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW, JAWS begins skim reading from the current location of the cursor to the end of the document. However, one of the most useful aspects of the skim reading feature is the ability to create a summary of the current document. To generate a summary using your current skim reading settings, choose the Create Summary button.

The summary displays in the Results Viewer and contains all the text that matches the criteria you defined. Each segment of text is a link, and each is individually numbered. You can move to a segment and press ENTER to jump to its location within the document. Once you create a summary, it remains available, even if you switch to a different document or program, until you generate another or close the Results Viewer. You can press ALT+TAB to review the last summary that you created in the Results Viewer. However, you can only use the links if the summary was created from the active document.

Use Rule Type

Select one of the following radio buttons to choose the skim reading mode you want to use:

·         Read First Line of Paragraph – When you press CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW, JAWS reads the first line of each paragraph.

Note: The other options in this dialog box are not available if you select this radio button.

·         Read First Sentence of Paragraph – When you press CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW, JAWS reads the first sentence of each paragraph.

Note: The other options in this dialog box are not available if you select this radio button.

·         Text Rules Apply for Reading – When you press CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW, JAWS searches for text according to a text rule that you define. JAWS then reads the line, sentence, or paragraph that contains the matching text, depending on the option you have selected in the Speak Unit list.

·         Attributes and Color Rules Apply for Reading – When you press CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW, JAWS searches for text according to the selected text color and attributes. The selections made are cumulative, meaning that if you select bold and red text, JAWS will only search for text that is red and bold. If you add the italic attribute, then JAWS will only search for text that is red, bold, and italic. Any text that lacks any of these attributes or color is ignored by JAWS.

Rules History

This combo box allows you to create a new text reading rule or select an existing text reading rule. Text rules are logical expressions that tell JAWS to search for specific text when skim reading. JAWS then reads the line, sentence, or paragraph that contains the matching text, depending on the option you have selected in the Speak Unit list. You must select either the Text Rules Apply for Reading radio button or the Attributes and Color Rules Apply for Reading radio button if you want to use text rules while skim reading.

If you are creating a new text rule, select <New> from the combo box and then enter the appropriate search pattern, color or attribute rules, or speak unit rules. Once the rule is configured, press the Start Skim Reading button to save and start the new skim reading rule.

<New> is the default setting for this combo box.

Text Search Pattern

In the Text Rule edit box, enter a word or phrase that you want JAWS to search for while skim reading. Optionally, you can use a regular expression to further refine your search. There are many different ways to create these expressions. If you only want to search for text units that contain two or more words, separate each word with ".*" (that is, a period followed by an asterisk with no spaces between the words or symbols). For example, you can use the following expression to search for text units containing both the words "JAWS" and "MAGic":

JAWS.*MAGic

If you want to search for text units that contain any of several different words, separate each word with "|" (that is, a vertical bar with no spaces between the words or symbols). For example, you can use the following expression to search for text units containing either the words "JAWS" or "MAGic":

JAWS|MAGic

You can create more advanced expressions as well. For example, you can use the following expression to search for text units containing any year starting with "19":

19\d{2}\s

Tip: For more information on creating complex expressions, refer to the section Regular Expression Language Elements in the MSDN Library.

After you enter some text or a regular expression, type a name for the text rule in the Rule Name edit box. Choose OK to save the text rule. You can select which text rule you want to use in the Text Rules list.

Color or Attribute Rules

·         Text Color edit box – Use this combo box to select or enter a specific color that a passage of text uses. You can use the UP and DOWN ARROWS to cycle through a list of text colors,
 or you can type a color into the combo box. JAWS uses word prediction to predict the color that you want. An asterisk appears as the default setting.

·         Background Color edit box – Use this combo box to select a background color to be used for the skim reading rule. You can use the UP and DOWN ARROWS to cycle through a list of text
 colors, or you can type a color into the combo box. JAWS uses word prediction to predict the color that you want. An asterisk appears as the default setting.

·         Attribute Check Boxes – Select an attribute check box to search for the type of selected text in a document or Web page. Each attribute can be used inconjunction with any other text attribute. The following attributes are available: Bold, Italic, Underline, Strikeout, Double Strikeout, Superscript, Subscript, Shadow, and Outline. These check boxes are only available when the Attributes and Color Rules Apply for Reading radio button is selected.

Delete Rule

To delete a text rule, select it in the Rules History list and then choose the Delete Rule button.

Delete All Rules

To delete all your saved text rules, choose the Delete All Rules button.

Speak Unit

Select whether JAWS should read the paragraph, sentence, or line containing any text that matches the currently selected text rule.

Use Regular Expression

A regular expression is a search string that uses special characters to help you define the search and match text patterns. This feature is used primarily by advanced users. Do not select this check box if you are simply performing a plain text search. This check box is unchecked by default and is only available if the Text Rules Apply for Reading radio button is selected.

Skim Reading Indication

If you select this check box, JAWS notifies you when skimming past units of text that do not match the currently selected text rule. JAWS beeps once for every 20 units that it skips.

Start Skim Reading

Choose this button to save your changes and begin skim reading from your current location.

Create Summary

Choose this button to create a summary of the current page in the Results Viewer. This summary contains all the text you would hear if you began skim reading from your present location using your currently selected options. The summary remains available until you create another, even if you switch to another document or program.

Close

Choose this button to close the dialog box without saving the last changes made.

 

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Currency Abbreviations

Use the following abbreviations for the Convert Currency lookup source.

·         EUR = Euro

·         USD = United States Dollars

·         GBP = United Kingdom Pounds

·         CAD = Canada Dollars

·         AUD = Australia Dollars

·         JPY = Japan Yen

·         INR = India Rupees

·         NZD = New Zealand Dollars

·         CHF = Switzerland Francs

·         ZAR = South Africa Rand

·         DZD = Algeria Dinars

·         ARS = Argentina Pesos

·         BHD = Bahrain Dinars

·         BRL = Brazil Reais

·         BGN = Bulgaria Leva

·         CLP = Chile Pesos

·         CNY = China Yuan Renminbi

·         COP = Colombia Pesos

·         CRC = Costa Rica Colones

·         HRK = Croatia Kuna

·         CZK = Czech Republic Koruny

·         DKK = Denmark Kroner

·         DOP = Dominican Republic Pesos

·         EGP = Egypt Pounds

·         EEK = Estonia Krooni

·         FJD = Fiji Dollars

·         HKD = Hong Kong Dollars

·         HUF = Hungary Forint

·         ISK = Iceland Kronur

·         IDR = Indonesia Rupiahs

·         ILS = Israel New Shekels

·         JMD = Jamaica Dollars

·         JOD = Jordan Dinars

·         KES = Kenya Shillings

·         KRW = South Korea Won

·         KWD = Kuwait Dinars

·         LBP = Lebanon Pounds

·         MYR = Malaysia Ringgits

·         MUR = Mauritius Rupees

·         MXN = Mexico Pesos

·         MAD = Morocco Dirhams

·         NOK = Norway Kroner

·         OMR = Oman Rials

·         PKR = Pakistan Rupees

·         PEN = Peru Nuevos Soles

·         PHP = Philippines Pesos

·         PLN = Poland Zlotych

·         QAR = Qatar Riyals

·         RON = Romania New Lei

·         RUB = Russia Rubles

·         SAR = Saudi Arabia Riyals

·         SGD = Singapore Dollars

·         LKR = Sri Lanka Rupees

·         TWD = Taiwan New Dollars

·         THB = Thailand Baht

·         TTD = Trinidad and Tobago Dollars

·         TND = Tunisia Dinars

·         TRY = Turkey Lira

·         AED = United Arab Emirates Dirhams

·         VEB = Venezuela Bolivares

·         VND = Vietnam Dong

·         ZMK = Zambia Kwacha

 

 

 

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Back                  |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

JAWS Key

With most commands, JAWS uses the INSERT key as a "modifier" key. INSERT is pressed in combination with other keys to activate commands. JAWS now lets you choose which key to use for this modifier, which we call the JAWS Key. The keys available to use are:

·         INSERT

·         CAPS LOCK

·         SCROLL LOCK

By default, the INSERT key is set as the JAWS Key in the Desktop keyboard layout, and the CAPS LOCK key is set as the JAWS Key in the Laptop keyboard layout. So you can change the JAWS Key in two ways. Change to a different keyboard layout, or change which JAWS Key is assigned in a keyboard layout.

Changing the Keyboard Layout

To change the keyboard layout, from the JAWS application window, press ALT+O to open the Options menu and press ENTER to open the Basic Settings dialog. Move to the Keyboard Layout combo box and use the ARROW Keys to select the layout you wish to use.

Assigning a Different JAWS Key

To change the key used as the JAWS Key for the active keyboard layout:

1.    Open Settings Center (INSERT+F2) and expand the Keyboard group.

2.    Select JAWS Keys for Desktop Layout, and then select the key you want to use as the modifier key for the active keyboard layout.

3.    Choose OK to save changes and close Settings Center.

Note:  When using MAGic Screen Magnification software, it allows you to select which key to use as the MAGic Key. Since JAWS now provides the same flexibility for the JAWS Key, when the two products are used together, it is important that you do not assign the same key for the MAGic Key and the JAWS Key. If they are assigned to the same key, any JAWS commands assigned to a key combination using the JAWS Key are not activated when the key combination is pressed.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on JAWS Keystrokes for Reading Text

General Notes

Most of the keystrokes for reading text move the active cursor to the beginning of the text being read. Keystrokes for reading the current character, line, word, or sentence do not move the active cursor. Most of these keystrokes work in all cursor modes. The JAWS and Invisible cursors only read text already on the screen; they cannot scroll a document in the manner the PC cursor or Virtual PC cursor can.

Keystroke Specific Notes

Say Prior Sentence (ALT+UP ARROW)

In Microsoft Word, WordPerfect, Microsoft Outlook messages, or documents being navigated with the Virtual Cursor unless focused on a combo box, this keystroke moves to the prior sentence in the document and reads it. Otherwise, this keystroke performs the command specified by the application or closes a combo box.

Say Next Sentence (ALT+DOWN ARROW)

In Microsoft Word, WordPerfect, Microsoft Outlook messages, or documents being navigated with the Virtual Cursor unless focused on a combo box, this keystroke moves to the next sentence in the document and reads it. Otherwise, this keystroke performs the command specified by the application or opens a combo box.

Say Character Phonetically (NUM PAD 5 pressed twice quickly)

This keystroke says the current character phonetically. After pressing this keystroke, LEFT ARROW says the prior character phonetically and RIGHT ARROW says the next character phonetically until some other keystroke is pressed. This keystroke works in all cursor modes.

Say ASCII or Hexadecimal Value (NUM PAD 5 pressed three times quickly)

This keystroke reads the ASCII value of the current character. If you want to hear the hexadecimal value of the current character instead, select the Speak Character Value in Hex check box in the Images and Symbols group in Settings Center.

Spell Word (INSERT+NUM PAD 5 pressed twice quickly)

This keystroke spells the current word. After pressing this keystroke, INSERT+LEFT ARROW spells the prior word and INSERT+RIGHT ARROW spells the next word until some other keystroke is pressed. This keystroke works in all cursor modes.

Select Prior Word (SHIFT+INSERT+LEFT ARROW)

If the caret (insertion point) is in the middle of a word when this keystroke is pressed, the selection will be from that point in the word to the beginning of the current word. This keystroke works in PC and Virtual PC cursor modes. In JAWS and Invisible Cursor modes, this keystroke will only work in some applications.

Select Word (SHIFT+INSERT+RIGHT ARROW)

If the caret (insertion point) is in the middle of a word when this keystroke is pressed, the selection will be from that point in the word to the beginning of the next word. This keystroke works in PC and Virtual PC cursor modes. In JAWS and Invisible Cursor modes, this keystroke will only work in some applications.

Say To Cursor (INSERT+HOME)

Any text to the left of, and on the same line as, the active cursor is read. This keystroke works in all cursor modes. This keystroke does not move the active cursor.

Say From Cursor (INSERT+PAGE UP)

Any text to the right of, and on the same line as, the active cursor is read. This keystroke works in all cursor modes. This keystroke does not move the active cursor.

Say All (INSERT+DOWN ARROW)

When in JAWS or Invisible Cursor modes, this keystroke stops reading when the text currently displayed on the screen has been read, or when interrupted. When in PC or Virtual PC Cursor modes, this keystroke reads to the end of the current document, or until interrupted.

While using the Say All command, you can press the LEFT or RIGHT ARROW keys to rewind or fast forward through the text. Pressing LEFT ARROW to rewind during a Say All returns to the previous element of text (line, sentence, or paragraph). When rewinding, you can only return to the point at which you issued the Say All command. Pressing RIGHT ARROW to fast forward during a Say All advances to the next element of text. To change the text element length (line, sentence, or paragraph), select Say All Reads in the Say All group in Settings Center.

Tip: You can also use the left and right SHIFT keys to rewind and fast forward during a Say All.

To increase the speech rate for the current voice during a Say All, press PAGE UP. To decrease the speech rate, press PAGE DOWN. For more information on changing the voice rate, see Change Voice Rate on the Fly.

Toggle Speech On or Off (INSERT+SPACEBAR, S)

Use this keystroke to mute speech. It is a layered keystroke, which means that you must first press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, and then press S to toggle speech on or off.

Say Color (INSERT+5)

This keystroke works in all cursor modes.

Say Font (INSERT+F)

This keystrokes speaks the font type, size, and any special attributes such as highlighted of the character at the cursor location. Press twice quickly to display the information in the virtual viewer.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on Navigation - Information Keystrokes

Say Window Title (INSERT+T)

This keystroke reads the active title bar.

Say Top Line of Window (INSERT+END)

This keystroke may have different results in different applications. In some programs, it will read the title bar, while in others it may read the menus or toolbars at the top of the window.

Say Bottom Line of Window (INSERT+PAGE DOWN )

This keystroke reads the bottom line of a window, which is normally where a status bar is located.

Say Application Version (CTRL+INSERT+V)

This keystroke states the version information for the active application. If you press CTRL+INSERT+V while JAWS is the active window, this command displays your JAWS version number and authorization information, including your Locking code, Authorization number, and serial number. It also lists all the speech synthesizers and Braille displays that you have installed. This information is displayed in the Virtual Viewer so you can copy and paste it into a document or edit box.

Bring Up Window List (INSERT+F10)

This keystroke brings up a dialog box listing all open applications and their window states; i.e., minimized, restored, or maximized. Select an item from the list and press ENTER to switch to that application.

List System Tray Icons (INSERT+F11)

This keystroke brings up a dialog box listing items in the System Tray. Select an item from the list, and then TAB to buttons to simulate different mouse clicks on the item.

List Labeled Graphics (CTRL+INSERT+SHIFT+G)

This keystroke brings up a dialog box listing all labeled graphics in the active window. Select an item from the list and press ENTER to simulate a single left mouse button click on the graphic. This feature is similar to the CallToolbars (INSERT+F8) command available in some popular applications, however this feature is not application specific.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on JAWS Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

Say Default Button of Dialog (INSERT+E)

This keystroke states which button pressing ENTER activates.

Say Current Control Hot Key (SHIFT+NUM PAD 5)

This keystroke reads the hot key shortcut for the current item. The hot key activates a control when pressed with ALT, even if that item does not have focus.

Read Dialog in Tab Order (INSERT+B)

This keystroke says all the controls in a dialog in the same order as TAB would cycle through them.

Say Window Prompt in Text (INSERT+TAB)

This keystroke states the type of control that currently has focus, and reads the text in the control. This keystroke does not work in Virtual PC Cursor mode.

Read Word in Context (INSERT+C)

This keystroke works in many spell check dialogs to read words as they were originally used.

Select Multiple List Items (CTRL+SHIFT or CTRL+SPACEBAR)

To select multiple list items that are next to each other, press and hold down CTRL+SHIFT and use the UP ARROW or DOWN ARROW keys. To select multiple list items that are not next to each other, press and hold down CTRL and use the UP ARROW or DOWN ARROW keys to move to items you want to select. Still holding down CTRL, press SPACEBAR to select items.

Unselect All But Current (CTRL+\)

This keystroke removes the selection of all items in a list except the current item.

Read List View Columns 1 through 10 (CTRL+INSERT+1 through 0)

This keystroke allows you to read the contents of the first ten columns in a list view. CTRL+INSERT+1 reads the first column in the list view, CTRL+INSERT+2 reads the second column, and so on. This command only reads the item in the currently selected row, and not all items in that column of the list view.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on JAWS Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation

PC Cursor (NUM PAD PLUS)

This command changes the active cursor to the PC cursor. If the currently active cursor is the Touch Cursor, you must press this command twice quickly in order to activate the PC Cursor.

JAWS Cursor (NUM PAD MINUS)

This command changes the active cursor to the JAWS cursor.

Invisible Cursor (NUM PAD MINUS twice quickly)

This command changes the active cursor to the Invisible cursor.

Touch Cursor (SHIFT+NUM PAD PLUS)

This command changes the active cursor to the Touch cursor. For more information, see Using the Touch Cursor.

Route Touch Cursor to Focus Location (INSERT+NUM PAD PLUS)

This command moves the Touch Cursor to the location of the object that currently has focus. It is only available if the Touch Cursor is the currently active cursor.

Route PC Cursor to JAWS Cursor (INSERT+NUM PAD PLUS)

This command moves the PC Cursor to the location of the JAWS Cursor. This command has no effect if the JAWS Cursor is in a part of the application that will not support the PC Cursor.

Route JAWS Cursor to PC Cursor (INSERT+NUM PAD MINUS)

This command moves the JAWS Cursor to the location of the PC Cursor. If the Invisible Cursor is active when this keystroke is used, the Invisible Cursor is moved to the location of the PC Cursor.

Tether JAWS to PC (CTRL+INSERT+NUM PAD MINUS)

This command causes the JAWS Cursor to follow the PC Cursor as it moves around the screen. Press the command twice quickly to save this setting across sessions.

Restrict JAWS Cursor or Virtual PC Cursor (INSERT+R)

This command toggles restriction levels for the JAWS and Invisible cursors. The following briefly describes the different restriction levels:

·         Typically, a real window is any window that has a name, for example, a dialog box or an application main window. The Real Window Restriction limits the JAWS or Invisible cursors to these windows.

·         Current Window Restriction restricts the JAWS or Invisible cursors to the current window. This is very useful in a text box or a window with multiple panes displaying information.

·         Frame Restriction restricts the JAWS or Invisible cursors to the current frame.

·         Focus Window Restriction limits the JAWS or Invisible cursor to the window that currently has system focus. This typically means the window that contains the insertion pointer, caret, or highlight bar.

·         Unrestricted mode removes all restrictions on movement of the JAWS or Invisible cursors within the display area.

·         Application Window Restriction restricts the JAWS or Invisible cursors to the current application window.

When focused in a dialog box that is part of a web page, this command also toggles Virtual Cursor restriction. When restricted, Virtual Cursor navigation is limited to only the content in the dialog box.

Left Mouse Button (NUM PAD SLASH)

This command simulates a single left mouse button click. Press the command twice quickly to simulate a left mouse button double click.

Right Mouse Button (NUM PAD STAR)

This command simulates a single right mouse button click. Press the command twice quickly to simulate a right mouse button double click.

Left Mouse Button Lock (INSERT+NUM PAD SLASH)

This command simulates pressing down the left mouse button and holding it. Once pressed, the JAWS cursor can be moved with the arrow keys. JAWS will not speak until INSERT+NUM PAD SLASH is pressed again to unlock the left mouse button. This command can be used to drag items from one location and drop them in another.

Right Mouse Button Lock (INSERT+NUM PAD STAR)

This command simulates pressing down the right mouse button and holding it. Once pressed, the JAWS cursor can be moved with the arrow keys. JAWS will not speak until INSERT+NUM PAD STAR is pressed again to unlock the right mouse button. This command can be used to drag items from one location and drop them in another. When the command is pressed a second time to unlock the right mouse button, a menu may appear with options such as Copy Here, Move Here, and Create Shortcut Here.

Drag and Drop (CTRL+INSERT+NUM PAD SLASH)

This command is used to drag items from one location and drop them in another. Position the JAWS Cursor on the item you wish to move and press CTRL+INSERT+NUM PAD SLASH. You can leave the JAWS Cursor active, or you can switch to the PC Cursor. JAWS will keep speaking as you navigate. Once you have positioned the JAWS or PC Cursor in the location to which you would like to move the item, press CTRL+INSERT+NUM PAD SLASH again, and the item will be moved to the position of the active cursor.

Say Active Cursor (ALT+DELETE)

This command says the name of the active cursor and its position in pixels. When working in certain programs (such as word processors, text editors, and e-mail) with the PC Cursor, JAWS may announce the column and row position instead. In addition, JAWS announces the percentage of the current document you have moved or read through.

Tip: If JAWS announces the row and column position of the PC Cursor, and you want to hear the position in pixels instead, press NUM PAD MINUS to switch to the JAWS Cursor, then press INSERT+NUM PAD MINUS to route the JAWS Cursor to the PC Cursor. Press ALT+DELETE again to hear the position in pixels.

Say Cursor Type (CTRL+INSERT+SHIFT+C)

This command announces the shape of the current mouse cursor.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on Miscellaneous JAWS Keystrokes

Quick Settings (INSERT+V)

This command opens a dialog box that allows you to change what and/or how much information JAWS speaks. The options available in this dialog box are specific to the active application. In many applications, settings changed in this manner are only changed until JAWS is restarted.

JAWS Window (INSERT+J)

This command makes the JAWS window active. If JAWS is set to run from the system tray, this command opens the same menu as if you choose JAWS from the Select System Tray Icon Dialog (INSERT+F11).

JAWS Find (INSERT+CTRL+F)

This command opens the JAWS Find dialog. From this dialog, you can search for text or the text of labeled graphics. This find feature only searches within the currently displayed area of the screen. It will not scroll a document to search it completely.

Keyboard Lock (INSERT+SPACEBAR, L)

The Keyboard Lock feature is useful when you want to prevent accidental keyboard action. A typical example for locking the keyboard would be when you are transferring files across a network or when a download is in progress. This feature will prevent file transfer or download cancellation if you accidentally press a key. Keyboard Lock is also ideal for JAWS Tandem sessions where it can prevent inadvertent keyboard activity on the target-side computer.

While the keyboard is locked, you can still run JAWS reading commands like Say Line, Say Window Title, and Say Word. For example, you can position the JAWS cursor at a specific location on the screen, and then use the Say Line command to monitor that location while the keyboard is locked. Also, the invisible cursor and the braille cursor can roam the screen without moving the active cursor.

To toggle Keyboard Lock on and off, press INSERT+SPACEBAR, L. Although this feature locks the keyboard and braille display, it does not affect mouse activity.

Refresh Screen (INSERT+ESC)

JAWS uses a memory buffer of information from the active window to make speech flow more smoothly. This command refreshes that memory buffer. If it seems as though JAWS may be skipping characters or words while reading, use this command.

In addition, this command also checks the sound device being used by JAWS or Fusion to make sure it is not currently muted or has the sound level set to 0 percent. If muted, it will be unmuted. If set to 0 percent, it will be raised to 50 percent. The sound device is also checked every time JAWS or Fusion is restarted. If you have muted JAWS speech and not the sound device, this command will not cause the speech to be unmuted.

Screen Echo Toggle (INSERT+S)

This command toggles the screen echo between highlighted, all, and none. Highlighted is the default.

Typing Echo Toggle (INSERT+2)

This command toggles the typing echo between characters, words, characters and words, and none.

Audio Ducking Toggle (INSERT+SPACEBAR, D)

This command toggles the ducking of audio from other applications while JAWS is speaking. When other audio is ducked, it is reduced in volume so that JAWS can be more easily heard. Audio ducking is only available in Windows 8 or later.

Pass Key Through (INSERT+3)

After this command is pressed, the next command is ignored by JAWS and is passed directly to the active application. This is very useful if a JAWS command conflicts with an application command.

Select Symbol to Print (INSERT+4)

This command displays a dialog box containing a list of graphic symbols such as foreign language characters. Select a symbol from the list and press ENTER to place the symbol in a document or edit field.

Say Active Configuration Name (INSERT+Q)

This command states the name of the settings files currently loaded, and the name of the active application. Press twice quickly to display the information in the virtual viewer, where you can copy it into other applications.

Custom Highlight Assign (INSERT+CTRL+H)

This command opens dialogs that allow you to assign custom highlights based on the colors of text at the active cursor.

Copy Selected Text to FSClipboard (INSERT+WINDOWS Key+C)

FSClipboard extends the functionality of the Windows Clipboard. When you use the Windows Copy (CTRL+C) or Cut (CTRL+X) commands to place text on the Clipboard, it replaces any text already there. With FSClipboard, text that you copy is added to any text that you have previously copied. This allows you to continue adding text to the Clipboard until you are ready to paste it into a document.

Script Utility Mode (INSERT+WINDOWS Key+NUM PAD MINUS)

Toggle on or off Script Utility Mode. This function is for advanced scripters. The laptop keystroke is CAPS LOCK+WINDOWS Key+DASH.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on Keystrokes for Accessing the JAWS Utilities

Create a Prompt (CTRL+INSERT+TAB)

This command opens a dialog box allowing you to assign a speech and Braille label to a control in a dialog box.

Graphics Labeler (INSERT+G)

This command opens a dialog box allowing you to assign a text label to a graphic. This keystroke only works if the JAWS cursor is focused on a graphic.

Start Auto Graphics Labeler (CTRL+INSERT+G)

This command starts the auto graphics labeler, which attempts to label all graphics in the current window of the active application. The labels are based on tooltip text associated with each graphic, so graphics without tooltip labels cannot be labeled in this manner.

Set Frame Top Left (CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT BRACKET)

This command sets the top left corner for a frame based on the location of the JAWS or Invisible Cursor. If the bottom right corner of the frame has already been set, this command also brings up Frame Manager so the frame can be named and other Properties can be set.

Set Frame Bottom Right (CTRL+SHIFT+RIGHT BRACKET)

This command sets the bottom right corner for a frame based on the location of the JAWS or Invisible Cursor. If the top left corner of the frame has already been set, this command also brings up Frame Manager so the frame can be named and other Properties can be set.

Set Frame to Window (CTRL+SHIFT+LEFT BRACKET pressed twice quickly)

This command sets a frame to the area of a control to which the JAWS or Invisible Cursor is pointing, and brings up Frame Manager so the frame can be named and additional properties can be set.

Clear Initial Values (CTRL+INSERT+C)

This command cancels setting a frame or dragging and dropping if you decide not to complete the operation.

Run JAWS Manager (INSERT+F2)

This command brings up a dialog box from which you can access the various JAWS managers.

Screen Sensitive Help Technical (CTRL+INSERT+F1)

This command provides technical information for the current control that may be useful when writing scripts, such as the control ID, window class, and window handle.

Say special Window Classes (CTRL+INSERT+F2)

This command provides the window class of the parent window, next window, prior window, and child window. Press the command multiple times to cycle through the information.

Say Frame at Cursor (INSERT+X)

This keystroke speaks all text within the boundaries of the frame in which the active cursor is located.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on JAWS Keystrokes for Accessing Help

Screen Sensitive Help (INSERT+F1)

This keystroke places the current window or control information, what it is used for, and some keystrokes that work in it in the virtual viewer. This keystroke works in all cursor modes.

Keyboard Help (INSERT+1)

Once this keystroke is pressed, press any other keystroke and JAWS will give you information about what that keystroke does. Press the keystroke twice quickly for detailed information. You must press INSERT+1 again to return the keyboard to its normal function. Press the keystroke three times to hear JAWS say and spell the name of the script attached to that keystroke.

JAWS Help for Applications (INSERT+F1 pressed twice quickly)

This keystroke provides JAWS specific help for applications supported by JAWS.

Hot Key Help (INSERT+H)

This keystroke opens the virtual viewer and lists the JAWS keystrokes for the current application.

Window Key Help (INSERT+W)

This keystroke opens the virtual viewer and lists the Windows keystrokes for the current application.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on Laptop Keystrokes for Reading Text and Information

General Notes

Most of the keystrokes for reading text move the active cursor to the beginning of the text being read. Keystrokes for reading the current character, line, word, sentence, or paragraph do not move the active cursor. Most of these keystrokes work in all cursor modes. The JAWS and Invisible cursor can only read text already on the screen; they cannot scroll a document in the manner the PC cursor or Virtual PC cursor can.

Keystroke Specific Notes

Say Character Phonetically (CAPS LOCK+COMMA twice quickly)

After pressing this keystroke, CAPS LOCK+M says the prior character phonetically and CAPS LOCK+PERIOD says the next character phonetically until some other keystroke is pressed. This keystroke works in all cursor modes.

Say ASCII or Hexadecimal Value (CAPS LOCK+COMMA three times quickly)

This keystrokes reads the ASCII value of the current character. If you want to hear the hexadecimal value of the current character instead, select the Speak Character Value in Hex check box in the Images and Symbols group in Settings Center.

Spell Word (CAPS LOCK+K twice quickly)

After pressing this keystroke, CAPS LOCK+J spells the prior word and CAPS LOCK+L spells the next word until some other keystroke is pressed. This keystroke works in all cursor modes.

Say to Cursor (CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+J)

Any text to the left of, and on the same line as, the active cursor is read. This keystroke works in all cursor modes. This keystroke does not move the active cursor.

Say from Cursor (CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+L)

Any text to the right of, and on the same line as, the active cursor is read. This keystroke works in all cursor modes. This keystroke does not move the active cursor.

Say All (CAPS LOCK+A or CAPS LOCK+DOWN ARROW)

When in JAWS or Invisible Cursor modes, this keystroke stops reading when the text currently displayed on the screen has been read, or when interrupted. When in PC or Virtual PC Cursor modes, this keystroke reads to the end of the current document, or until interrupted.

Say Top Line of Window (CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+Y)

This keystroke may have different results in different applications. In some programs, it reads the title bar, while in others it may read the menus or toolbars at the top of the window.

Say Bottom Line of Window (CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+N)

This keystroke reads the bottom line of a window, which is normally where a status bar is located.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on Laptop Keystrokes for Cursors and Mouse Simulation

Route Touch Cursor to Focus Location (CAPS LOCK+APOSTROPHE)

This command moves the Touch Cursor to the location of the object that currently has focus. It is only available if the Touch Cursor is the currently active cursor.

Route PC Cursor to JAWS Cursor (CAPS LOCK+APOSTROPHE)

This keystroke moves the PC Cursor to the location of the JAWS Cursor. This keystroke has no effect if the JAWS Cursor is in a part of the application that will not support the PC Cursor.

Route JAWS Cursor to PC Cursor (CAPS LOCK+LEFT BRACKET)

This keystroke moves the JAWS Cursor to the location of the PC Cursor. If the Invisible Cursor is active when this keystroke is used, the Invisible Cursor is moved to the location of the PC Cursor.

Left Mouse Button (CAPS LOCK+8)

This keystroke simulates a single left mouse button click. Press the keystroke twice quickly to simulate a left mouse button double click.

Right Mouse Button (CAPS LOCK+9)

This keystroke simulates a single right mouse button click. Press the keystroke twice quickly to simulate a right mouse button double click.

Left Mouse Button Lock (CTRL+8)

This keystroke simulates pressing down the left mouse button and holding it. Once pressed, the JAWS cursor can be moved with the ARROW keys. JAWS will not speak until CTRL+8 is pressed again to unlock the left mouse button. This keystroke can be used to drag items from one location and drop them in another.

Right Mouse Button Lock (CTRL+9)

This keystroke simulates pressing down the right mouse button and holding it. Once pressed, the JAWS cursor can be moved with the ARROW keys. JAWS will not speak until CTRL+9 is pressed again to unlock the right mouse button. This keystroke can be used to drag items from one location and drop them in another. When the keystroke is pressed a second time to unlock the right mouse button, a menu may appear with options such as Copy Here, Move Here, and Create Shortcut Here.

Drag and Drop (CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+8)

This keystroke is used to drag items from one location and drop them in another. Position the JAWS Cursor on the item you wish to move and press CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+8 . You can leave the JAWS Cursor active, or you can switch to the PC Cursor. JAWS keeps speaking as you navigate. Once you have positioned the JAWS or PC Cursor in the location to which you would like to move the item, press CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+8 again, and the item is moved to the position of the active cursor.

Note: The original position of what you are dragging, and the location to which you are moving it must both be visible on the screen when you press CAPS LOCK+SHIFT+8 the second time or the drag and drop will not work.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on General Windows Keystrokes

Get Help (F1)

This keystroke brings up help for the active application.

Switch between Open Applications (ALT+TAB)

If pressed once, this keystroke switches focus to the open application that was last used prior to the current application being used. To cycle through open applications to find the one you want, hold down ALT and press and release TAB until you find it. Then release both keys. The ALT+TAB "switch to" order is determined by the order in which applications have last been used, not by the order in which they were originally opened.

Open the Shortcut Menu (APPLICATION KEY or SHIFT+F10)

This keystroke brings up a shortcut menu (context menu) for the item that has the PC Cursor focus.

Minimize all Windows (WINDOWS KEY+M)

Some dialog boxes cannot be minimized. Using this keystroke with a dialog box of this type open can result in the system focus being on the Windows Desktop with most of the Desktop covered by the dialog box - preventing JAWS from reading the desktop items properly.

Move to First Item on the Taskbar (WINDOWS KEY+TAB)

This keystroke moves focus to the first item on the taskbar, but does not open that application.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on General Windows Application Keystrokes

Exit the Active Application (ALT+F4)

If this keystroke is pressed while an unsaved file is opened in the active application, you will often be asked if you wish to save the file before exiting.

Open the Application Control Menu (ALT+SPACEBAR)

The Control menu gives you access to menu items that allow you to change the window state between restored, minimized, and maximized; move the window; or close the window.

Move to the Menu Bar (ALT)

This keystroke places the PC Cursor focus on the first menu on the menu bar without displaying the contents of the menu. Use the RIGHT ARROW or LEFT ARROW to select another menu on the menu bar. Press UP ARROW or DOWN ARROW to open the menu and navigate through the menu items.

Cancel or Close a Menu (ESC or ALT)

ESC collapses one level of a menu. If the File menu is displayed, pressing ESC closes it and moves focus to the Menu bar. Pressing ESC again returns focus to the application window. ALT closes a menu and returns focus to the application window.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on Windows Keystrokes for Working in Dialog Boxes

Move to Another Page (CTRL+TAB)

In a multi-page dialog box, this keystroke moves focus to the next page (or tab). In some dialogs, after cycling through all pages, this keystroke goes back to the initial page, but in others, it stops at the last page.

Reverse Direction through Pages (CTRL+SHIFT+TAB)

In a multi-page dialog box, this keystroke moves focus to the previous page (or tab). In some dialogs, after cycling through all pages, this keystroke goes back to the last page, but in others, it stops at the initial page.

Select/Deselect in List View (SPACEBAR or CTRL+SPACEBAR)

To select multiple list items, press and hold down CTRL and use the UP ARROW or DOWN ARROW keys to move to items you want to select. Still holding down CTRL, press SPACEBAR to select items. Press SPACEBAR a second time to unselect an item.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on Windows Keystrokes for Working with Text

General Notes

Many of these keystrokes are designed to move the caret (also called the insertion point) in a document as indicated. For many of these keystrokes, JAWS adds the functionality of reading the element to which the caret is moved, i.e., character, word, or paragraph. When SHIFT is added to the keystroke, the text from the caret's original position to its new position will be selected. This does not work reliably with the keystrokes for moving by paragraph, though. JAWS also adds support for using many of these keystrokes with the JAWS, Invisible, and virtual PC cursors. The JAWS and Invisible cursors can only read text already on the screen; they cannot scroll a document in the manner the PC cursor or Virtual PC cursor can.

Keystroke Specific Notes

Select All (CTRL+A)

This keystroke will not work in all applications.

Undo (CTRL+Z)

This keystroke can be very useful, especially in text fields in dialog boxes. However, not all actions can be undone, so this keystroke will not always work.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Additional Notes on Keystrokes for Working in Windows Explorer

Delete Selected File or Folder (DELETE)

When deleting a file, you may be prompted to confirm that this is what you wish to do.

Rename Selected File or Folder (F2)

If Windows is configured to hide file extensions for known file types, you will not be able to change file extensions for these files. When file extensions are displayed and you change them, you may get a warning message. This is because the file extension determines which application will open certain types of files.

Refresh Window (F5)

Use this keystroke if changes you have made do not seem to be reflected in what JAWS is indicating.

Switch Between Tree View and List View (F6 or TAB)

This keystroke switches focus between the available views. If the Address Bar and Toolbar are displayed, they are included in this "switch to" cycle.

Go Up One Folder Level (BACKSPACE)

The keystroke will move you to the previous level in the tree view. When you move back to that level the item you land on will not be selected, use the SPACEBAR to select it.

Open File or Folder Properties (ALT+ENTER)

Properties of files and folders will give you different information depending on the kind of file or folder you are requesting information for. If you look at the properties for a folder like My Documents, you will find out information such as the size and location of the folder as well as the attributes. If you get the properties for a shortcut, you can find out the location of the original file. Document properties will also tell you the name, location, and size, in addition to the author and the title. The properties for items in Windows Explorer encompass a wide range of possibilities.

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

Keystrokes for Windows Applications

Windows Calculator

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Internet Applications

Adobe Acrobat and Reader

Front Page

Web Browsers

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for E-mail Applications

GroupWise

Lotus Notes

Outlook

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Word Processing Applications

Microsoft Word

WordPerfect

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Spreadsheet, Financial, and Database

Access

Excel

GoldMine

Lotus Notes

Quattro Pro

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Multimedia Applications

Audible Audio Manager

PowerPoint

RealPlayer

Winamp

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Utilities

WinZip

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Programming Tools

JAWS for Windows Support of JAVA

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Keystrokes for Miscellaneous Applications

HJPad

MAGic Screen Magnification

Microsoft Project

 

  ------ --- ------
  Back       Next
  ------ --- ------

Advanced Firewall Troubleshooting

Your firewall software should allow the following files to run so that it does not interfere with installing, activating, or using of JAWS. If you installed JAWS in the default location, all these files are located in the C:\Program Files\Freedom Scientific folder. The name and location of each file is shown in the following table, along with the connection type required and incoming/outgoing ports used.

 

+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| File Name                                              | Connection Type | Incoming Port   | Outgoing Port   |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| JAWS\X (where X is the JAWS version number)\JFW.exe    | UDP             | 5093            | 5093            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| JAWS\X (where X is the JAWS version number)\JFW.exe    | UDP             | 5094            | 5094            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| JAWS\X (where X is the JAWS version number)\JFW.exe    | UDP             | 5096            | 5096            |
|  (Only required if using redundant license servers)    |                 |                 |                 |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Activator\1.1\CAUtil.dll                               | TCP/IP          | 80              | 80              |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Activator\1.1\CAUtil.dll                               | TCP/IP          | 20              | 21              |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| JAWS\X (where X is the JAWS version number)\FSAuth.exe | UDP             | 5093            | 5093            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Activator\1.1\FSActivate.exe                           | TCP/IP          | 80              | 80              |
+--------------------------------------------------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

Tip: If you want to use the Automatic Updates feature to update your software, your firewall must allow JAWS to access ports 20 and 21 or port 80.

 

 

  ------ --- ---
  Back        
  ------ --- ---

 
