Freedom Scientific Logo Long Description

The Freedom Scientific logo is a picture of a hot air balloon with light blue colored stripes mixed with white stripes. The balloon looks like it is being pushed by a strong wind. To the right of the balloon are the words Freedom Scientific®. The text of the word Freedom is colored black, and the text of the word Scientific is the same color blue as the blue in the balloon.

Press ALT+F4 to close this window. ﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘JAWS, screen reader, web training, navigating the web’ lang: en title: ‘Surf'’s Up! Surfing the Internet with JAWS’ —

Skip to Navigation

Surfing the Internet with JAWS!

[A friendly shark rides the waves on a surf board. Behind an island in the distance, the stars and Milky Way glow in the sky. Surfing the Internet with JAWS opens a universe of opportunity!]

Learn to use JAWS® screen reading software to read and navigate the Internet! Do you want to become a power JAWS user on the World Wide Web? Do you want to learn how JAWS can help you navigate the vast resources of entertainment, education, and information available on the web? Surf's Up! - Surfing the Internet with JAWS teaches you to use JAWS to read and work with all types of HTML pages, such as web sites, Help systems, web-based applications, and more. Learn how to use the powerful features of JAWS to get the most out of surfing the web.

Note: Surf's Up assumes you are running the most recent version of JAWS. Features demonstrated on these pages may behave slightly different in older versions.

Surf's up! Let's See Where JAWS Can Take Us:

Introduction to Browsing the Web
Web Page Elements
Navigating Web Pages
Temporary Versus Permanent Changes
JAWS Web Verbosity
Tables
Forms
Frames
Languages
Dealing with Difficult Pages
Using the JAWS Find Command
Skim Reading
PlaceMarkers and the Custom Page Summary
Personalized Web Settings
Speech and Sounds Schemes
Using Custom Labels
Search Engines
Using HTML Help Systems
Aria Live Regions
Aria Live Regions, Atomic
Contacting Freedom Scientific

Getting Started With Surf's Up

You can use Surf's Up with the web browser of your choice, however, many of our exercises and examples regularly refer to the Google Chrome™ web browser. Chrome is one of the most popular browsers today as it is frequently updated to support the latest web standards. If you choose to use Chrome and it is already installed on your computer, you can launch it by selecting the Google Chrome shortcut on the Desktop.

Install Google Chrome

If you would like to install Chrome, do the following:

1.  From a web browser such as Internet Explorer or Firefox™, go to the Chrome download page.
2.  Press B to move to the Download Chrome button and press ENTER.
3.  Press B to move to the Accept and Install button and press ENTER. Chrome will automatically download and install.

Install Mozilla Firefox

If you would like to install Mozilla™ Firefox™, do the following:

1.  From a web browser such as Google Chrome, go to the Firefox download page.
2.  Press INSERT+F7 to open the JAWS list of links, and then choose the Download Now or Download in another language link.
3.  Press SHIFT+F6 to move to the Installer button on the bottom left side of the page, and then press ENTER to start the install.

Install Microsoft Edge

Microsoft's new Edge web browser based on Chromium, which works very well with JAWS, is slowly rolling out to Windows 10 devices over automatic updates. While it should be available to all users in the coming months, you can skip the wait and install it now by doing the following:

1.  From a web browser such as Google Chrome, go to the Edge download page.
2.  Press B to move to the Get stable build for Windows 10 button and press ENTER.
3.  Focus should land on the Accept terms link. Press ENTER to download the Edge installer.
4.  Press SHIFT+F6 to move to the setup file, and then press ENTER to start the install.

JAWS Help Keystrokes

JAWS provides context-sensitive help for many different elements you might encounter in web pages. To read help information for the current web page, or for an element within a web page, press INSERT+F1. For general help with whatever browser you are using press INSERT+F1 twice quickly while the browser is the active window. For Hot Key Help for browsers (or other apps) with JAWS press INSERT+H.

Tabbed Browsing

Many of the exercise pages and keystroke command pages in Surf's Up either open in new browser windows or in new browser tabs, depending on how your version of any browser is set up. You can press ALT+TAB to move between the different open windows, or CTRL+TAB to move between different tab pages in the current browser session. Also remember to close the open windows by pressing ALT+F4 when you are finished with them or close a single tab page by pressing CTRL+F4.

The JAWS Key

You will notice occasional references to the JAWS key when using JAWS. This key is used by JAWS in combination with other keys on the keyboard to perform various actions. For example, the JAWS Key+T reads the title of the current document while JAWS Key+F7 opens a list of links in a web page.

The default JAWS keys are as follows:

-   JAWS desktop layout uses the INSERT key
-   JAWS laptop layout uses the CAPS LOCK key

The JAWS key can be changed from the INSERT key to the CAPS LOCK or SCROLL LOCK key. This can be done by opening the list of JAWS managers (INSERT+F2) and choosing Settings Center. The JAWS Key for either desktop or laptop layout is found in the Keyboard branch of the tree view. This must be changed in the default settings which can be selected by pressing CTRL+SHIFT+D.

Access Keys to Navigate by Page Forward or Backward in Surf's Up

At the bottom of each page in Surf's Up are links to the next or prior page. Use the following Access Keys to navigate forward or backward one page at a time in Surf's Up:

-   ALT+N activates the Next page link
-   ALT+B activates the Back link to move to the prior page

NOTE: Firefox adds the SHIFT key to the key combination for access keys on web pages. If you use Firefox, press ALT+SHIFT+N or ALT+SHIFT+B to move to the next or prior pages with the access keys in Surf's Up.

Using Surf's Up on a Local Computer

Finally, you can download a ZIP file containing all Surf's Up pages and files. This allows you to install the whole Surf's Up training website on a local computer. For example, if you are an instructor, you could store it on a thumb drive for use if you ever encounter the need to do web-based training where there is no Internet connection.

Surf's Up ZIP file download

Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘Get started, surf the web, JAWS, virtual cursor’ lang: en title: Introduction to Browsing the Web —

[Surf's Up]

Introduction to Browsing the Web

Web browsers are programs that allow you to access web pages on the Internet, read HTML (hypertext markup language) documents on your computer, or view your local intranet site. These browsers don't just display information. They also help you find information using search engines, purchase products online using various online shopping sites, interact with other people using social media services, use web-based editing applications to create documents, and much more.

JAWS works best with the latest versions of Google Chrome™, Mozilla® Firefox®, the Microsoft® Edge® Chromium browser (initially released in early 2020), and Internet Explorer 11®. JAWS provides the same powerful features for each supported browser, allowing you to choose the one that best suits your needs.

When browsing the web, JAWS gives you quick access to the information you need, and provides detailed information about the structure and organization of web pages. Tables, lists, headings, and alternate text for images are all announced. The information comes right from the HTML used to create the page. HTML is designed with accessibility in mind, and JAWS supports more of the built-in HTML accessibility features than any other screen reader.

JAWS uses the Virtual Cursor on web pages, letting you read as you would in a word processing document. The Virtual Cursor is also available in other applications, such as HTML based help systems, HTML based e-mails in Outlook, and in PDF (Portable Document Format) files. Many of the features discussed within these topics are also available wherever the Virtual Cursor is used.

When you open the browser, your home page opens. If you don't have a home page specified, you can select a web page from your Favorites menu, or press ALT+D to move to the Address Bar and type in the address of a page. Once a page is selected, it is loaded and JAWS announces the page title along with the number of links, headings, and regions. Then, JAWS begins reading the text on the screen from top to bottom. To move through the page, use UP and DOWN ARROW, PAGE UP, and PAGE DOWN as you would in a word processing document. The JAWS commands to Read By Word, Line, Sentence, and Paragraph work normally.

If you are using Fusion, JAWS will not automatically begin reading the page after announcing the title followed by the number of elements. This prevents focus from being bumped back up to the top of the page if you are a low vision user attempting to navigate with the mouse. To change this setting, open JAWS Settings Center and select "Document and Web Pages Automatically Read."

As you navigate a page, JAWS says, "link," when it encounters a link to another document or portion of the page. To follow a link, press ENTER while positioned on the link.

To go back to the previous page, press ALT+LEFT ARROW or BACKSPACE. To move forward one page after you have moved back, press ALT+RIGHT ARROW.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘web pages, elements, JAWS, navigation quick keys, navigating the web’ lang: en title: Web Page Elements —

[Surf's Up]

Web Page Elements

Elements are used to create the structure of a web page and are used to present information in various ways. JAWS interacts with these elements to provide the information you need to access the page contents. Some of the most common web page elements you will encounter include:

-   Links
-   Paragraphs
-   Headings
-   Numbered and bulleted lists
-   Tables
-   Regions
-   Images
-   Form controls including radio buttons, edit fields, check boxes, combo boxes, list boxes, and buttons

JAWS provides easy to use and remember commands called Navigation Quick Keys for quickly moving to various elements on a web page. Press a single letter on your keyboard and move right to an item. For example, you can press T for tables, F for form controls, V for visited links, H for headings, and so on. Add SHIFT to any navigation quick key to move to the previous element of that type.

For instance, a sighted user can visually scan through headings on a page until they find the one they want and then focus in on the text in that section. Similarly, using JAWS, you can press H to quickly move through all of the headings on a page until you locate the one you want and then start reading with the ARROW keys.

Viewing Lists of Elements

JAWS can look at a web page and compile lists of paragraphs, links, headings, form fields, and other elements so you can quickly find what you need and move to information. Press INSERT+F3 to open the Virtual HTML Features dialog box. This dialog box allows you to choose from a variety of lists containing information about different types of elements on the current page. Select an item and press ENTER to view a list of all those elements.

You can also use the following commands to quickly display lists of the following important HTML elements:

-   Form Fields - Press INSERT+F5
-   Headings - Press INSERT+F6
-   Links - Press INSERT+F7

In addition, if you hold down CTRL+INSERT and press one of several Navigation Quick Keys, JAWS displays a list of those elements on the current page. For example, to display a list of check boxes on the current page, press CTRL+INSERT+X.

Use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to move through the lists and select items. Alternatively, press the first letter of an item to move right to it. Press ENTER to move to the selected item's location on the page.

Back          Next

﻿— generator: mshtml 6.00.2900.2668 lang: en title: Navigation Quick Keys for JAWS —

Navigation Quick Keys for JAWS

Navigation Quick Keys make it faster and easier to move around on a Web page and anywhere else the Virtual Cursor is active. These commands are all assigned to keys on the main part of the keyboard, and are easy to remember and use. Press CTRL+F4 to close this page when you are finished reading it.

HTML Navigation Quick Keys for Say All

Many of the JAWS navigation quick keys are also available while using Say All on a Web page. The commands to move by heading, paragraph, form control, table, list, same or different element, next element, and to move to non-link text all work while you are using the Say All command.

JAWS Tip: You can use the SHIFT key in combination with many of the keystrokes in the table below to move to the previous unit or element.

Description

Quick Key

Radio Button

A

Button

B

Combo Box, List Box, or Tree View

C

Different Type Element

D

Edit Box

E

Form Control

F

Graphic

G

Heading

H

Item in a List

I

Jump to Line

J

Return to Previous Line

SHIFT+J

Jump to Cell (Within Table)

CTRL+WINDOWS Key+J or WINDOWS Key+J in Mozilla Firefox

Return to Previous Table Cell

CTRL+SHIFT+WINDOWS Key+J or SHIFT+WINDOWS Key+J in Mozilla Firefox

PlaceMarker

K

Temporary PlaceMarker

WINDOWS Key+CTRL+K

Add, Delete, Edit, or Rename Permanent PlaceMarker

CTRL+SHIFT+K

Speak All PlaceMarkers

ALT+WINDOWS Key+K

PlaceMarker 1

7

PlaceMarker 2

8

PlaceMarker 3

9

PlaceMarker 4

0

List

L

Frame

M

Non-link Text

N

Article Region

O

Paragraph

P

Move to Main Region of a Page

Q

Region

R

Same Type Element

S

Table

T

Unvisited Link

U

Visited Link

V

Word From List

W

Check Box

X

Span

Y

Division

Z

Heading at Level

1 through 6

Separator

DASH

Clickable Element

SLASH

Move to OnMouseOver

SEMICOLON

Tab Control

APOSTROPHE

Step Past Element

SHIFT+PERIOD

Step Before Element

SHIFT+COMMA

Quick Keys Settings

Navigation Quick Keys are on by default, but you can turn them off, or set them to work only within Say All. Press INSERT+N (only when using the virtual cursor) to toggle this setting. You can also change this setting for Internet Explorer alone in Quick Settings with (INSERT+V), or globally for all programs in JAWS Settings Center.

Navigation Quick Key Manager

Navigation Quick Key manager is used to view, edit, or delete Navigation Quick Key assignments. To open Navigation Quick Key manager do the following:

1.  Press INSERT+J to switch to the JAWS window.
2.  From within the JAWS window press ALT+U to open the Utilities menu.
3.  Press N to open the Navigation Quick Key manager submenu. Focus moves to the first item of three, HTML/PDF.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move through the other two items. You find one for Microsoft Word and one for Microsoft Outlook.

NOTE: You can also find Navigation Quick Key Manager in the list of JAWS managers by pressing INSERT+F2.

Lists of Elements

If you hold down CTRL+INSERT before pressing certain navigation quick keys, JAWS displays a list of all elements of that particular type on the page. For example, to display a list of all check boxes on the page, press CTRL+INSERT+X. Use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to select an item in the list. You can then press ENTER to move to that item's location on the page.

You can use this keystroke to view lists of the following elements: buttons, check boxes, combo boxes, divisions, edit boxes, graphics, lists, radio buttons, tables, and more.

Additionally, you can get a list of all Virtual HTML Features on a Web page by pressing INSERT+F3.

Remember to press CTRL+F4 to close this page when you are finished reading it. ﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘JAWS, reading commands, reading keystrokes’ lang: en title: JAWS Reading Commands —

JAWS Reading Commands

The following is a list of the JAWS commands for reading text. To close this page, press CTRL+F4.

Description

Command

Prior Character

LEFT ARROW

Next Character

RIGHT ARROW

Current Character

NUM PAD 5

Say Character Phonetically

NUM PAD 5 twice quickly

Prior Word

INSERT+LEFT ARROW

Next Word

INSERT+RIGHT ARROW

Current Word

INSERT+NUM PAD 5

Spell Word

INSERT+NUM PAD 5 twice quickly

Prior Line

UP ARROW

Next Line

DOWN ARROW

Current Line

INSERT+UP ARROW

Spell Current Line

INSERT+UP ARROW twice quickly

Prior Sentence

ALT+UP ARROW

Next Sentence

ALT+DOWN ARROW

Current Sentence

ALT+NUM PAD 5

Prior Paragraph

CTRL+UP ARROW

Next Paragraph

CTRL+DOWN ARROW

Current Paragraph

CTRL+NUM PAD 5

Say to Cursor

INSERT+HOME

Say from Cursor

INSERT+PAGE UP

Spell to Cursor

INSERT+HOME twice quickly

Spell from Cursor

INSERT+PAGE UP twice quickly

Say All

INSERT+DOWN ARROW

Fast Forward during a Say All

RIGHT ARROW

Rewind during a Say All

LEFT ARROW

Toggle Speech On or Off

INSERT+SPACEBAR, S
Note: When using this keystroke, press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, and then press S.

Say Color

INSERT+5

Say ASCII Value

NUM PAD 5 three times quickly

Say Font

INSERT+F

Display Font Information in Virtual Viewer

INSERT+F twice quickly

Start Skim Reading

CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW ﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘tabbed browsing keystrokes, Chrome, Firefox, Internet Explorer, web browsers’ lang: en title: Tabbed BrowsingKeystrokes —

Tabbed Browsing Keystrokes

  Description                                    Command
  ---------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------
  Open a New Tab                                 CTRL+T
  Open a New Tab from the Address Bar            ALT+ENTER (on the address bar)
  Open a New Browser Window                      CTRL+N
  Switch to the Next Tab                         CTRL+TAB
  Switch to the Previous Tab                     CTRL+SHIFT+TAB
  Switch to a Specific Tab Number                CTRL+n, where n is a digit from 1 to 8
  Switch to Last Tab                             CTRL+9
  Close Current Tab                              CTRL+F4 or CTRL+W
  Close All Tabs                                 ALT+F4
  Close Other Tabs (Internet Explorer only)      CTRL+ALT+F4
  Open Links in a New Tab in the Background      CTRL+ENTER
  Open Links in a New Tab in the Foreground      CTRL+SHIFT+ENTER
  Move Tab Left (when tab is in focus)           CTRL+LEFT ARROW or CTRL+UP ARROW
  Move Tab Right (when tab is in focus)          CTRL+RIGHT ARROW or CTRL+DOWN ARROW
  Move Tab to Beginning (when tab is in focus)   CTRL +HOME
  Move Tab to End (when tab is in focus)         CTRL+END

﻿— lang: en title: ‘Jim'’s Cafe at Innisport’ —

[Jim's Cafe at Innisport]

Jim's Cafe was founded in 1946 by Jim Smith. At that time, Jim was a sergeant in the United States Army, who had just finished a tour of duty in Europe. Ready to begin civilian life, he settled down in the sleepy town of Innisport with his wife, Charlotte, and their son, James Jr.

Taking a second mortgage out on his home, he purchased a run-down book shop in downtown Innisport and set about realizing his dream of owning a successful restaurant. The first few years were lean, but as the town of Innisport grew and prospered, Jim's Cafe became a favorite place for lunch breaks and Saturday night dinners.

For over 60 years, Jim's Cafe has been renowned for excellent service, a dazzling variety of dishes and appetizers, and scenic location. Use the links below to read more:

Reputation for Quality Service

Dishes and Appetizers

Driving Directions

Links to Sites of Interest

 

Reputation for Quality Service

Jim's Cafe was an immediate success. The little cafe quickly garnered a reputation for friendly service and delicious food. Jim worked in the kitchen, while his wife and sister-in-law took care of the customers. Early on, the two sisters created a code which they decided to use to ensure that their reputation stayed strong. That code, which is still honored by the staff of Jim's Cafe today, reads as follows:

-   Always have a friendly smile and a kind word to say.
-   Service doesn't end when the food is served.
-   If it isn't done just right, send it back!

 

Dishes and Appetizers

Over the years, the menu at Jim's Cafe has grown and grown. As customers requested new dishes, Jim would add them to the menu. Now there are over 50 entrees available for lunch or dinner and 25 others for breakfast. Come in today to check out Jim's famous chicken noodle soup or sample the delicious fresh roast duck. We have a wide range of tastes to suit anybody.

The complete menu, with prices, is available online.

Poultry

Try Jim's tender roast duck or have the juicy turkey club sandwich for lunch. Jim's Cafe also serves a wide variety of chicken dishes, including grilled chicken, fried chicken, and chicken noodle soup.

Beef

Jim's Cafe serves only choice cuts of USDA-inspected beef. Have a delicious 12 ounce sirloin steak or the massive 16 ounce rib eye steak. We'll cook it any way you want it, and garnish it with mushrooms, onions, peppers, and more.

Seafood

The fishermen of Innisport bring fresh catches in every day. Try the local favorite, Broiled Whitefish, or treat yourself to king crab legs, lobster tail, oysters on the half shell, and much more. Our seafood is always fresh and cooked to perfection with the perfect blend of seasoning.

 

Driving Directions

Jim's Cafe is located in downtown Innisport, on 1800 Main St. To get there from Interstate 95, follow these directions:

Take exit 76 and turn right on Bridge Avenue.

Drive approximately 5 miles, until you arrive at the intersection of Bridge Avenue and Main Street.

Turn left on Main Street. There are several points of interest along this street:

-   On your right you'll see Innisport Town Square.
-   Inside the town square, you can see a statue of the town founder.
-   On your left, you'll see the old courthouse, built in 1792.

When you get to the intersection of Main Street and 2nd Avenue, you'll see Jim's Cafe on the left. There's plenty of parking in the back.

[Map to Jim's Cafe. Click the image to see a larger version with more detail.]

If you need any additional information, please send us an e-mail message.

 

Links to Sites of Interest

Innisport is a great town, and we're sure that you'll love it as much as we do. The following links will tell you more about the things to do or see here:

Innisport Museum of Nautical History

Bird Watching at Innisport Cove

Innisport Hotel

Muriel's Antiques

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  ---- --------------------------- ----
  []   [Freedom Scientific Logo]   []
  ---- --------------------------- ----

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, virtual cursor, JAWS, headings, links, images, regions, lists’ lang: en title: Navigating Web Pages —

[Surf's Up]

Navigating Web Pages

JAWS makes reading web pages easy. When you visit a page JAWS immediately begins reading the page from the top down. In this section, you will learn about Navigation Quick Keys, reading text, and navigating headings, lists, links, and images.

Reading Text

JAWS uses the Virtual Cursor to move through HTML pages, enabling JAWS users to read and select text and move to different elements on the page. The Virtual Cursor is invisible to sighted users, however, JAWS highlights text as it is read so a sighted user such as a teacher, parent, tester, or developer can easily follow the text visually.

The commands used to read web pages are the same as the commands used to read text in any other type of document. You can also select and copy text on web pages. The sample page Jim's Cafe at Innisport demonstrates the layout and content of a typical web page on the Internet.

JAWS Tip: To see a complete list of commands that you can use to read text in documents, refer to the JAWS Reading Commands table. If you are not yet familiar with JAWS table reading commands just press DOWN ARROW to move through and read the commands in the table.

JAWS Tip: To begin reading anywhere on a web page beneath the mouse cursor with JAWS, move the mouse pointer over the text you want to read. Then press the keystroke INSERT+NUM PAD PLUS. This is the keystroke to route the virtual cursor to the mouse cursor. Then use normal reading keys.

To practice reading text on the Internet with JAWS, do the following:

1.  Press INSERT+F7 to display a list of links on this page.
2.  Make sure the link Jim's Cafe at Innisport is selected and press ENTER. This opens the sample page in a new browser window. You can hold down CTRL and press TAB to switch back to this window and refer to these instructions. JAWS remembers where you are on the page, so you won't lose your place. If the page opens in a completely new window just use ALT+TAB to switch between windows.
3.  When the page loads, JAWS begins reading it. Press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page. Then press P three times to move to the second paragraph on the page. The first press of the letter P on this page moves to the graphic logo and heading level one at the top of the page for Jim's Cafe.
4.  Use the standard JAWS reading commands to read the text on the page. Any command that you can use to read text or Word documents can be used when reading web pages.
5.  Press SHIFT+P until you return to the first paragraph on the page.

JAWS Tip: The letter P is a Navigation Quick Key that lets you move by paragraph through the page. There are other Navigation Quick Keys that let you move through all the headings, links, images, and other elements on the page. If you hold SHIFT when you press one of these keys, JAWS moves to the previous element. For example, pressing SHIFT+P moves you to the previous paragraph. To read more about them choose the link Navigation Quick Keys.

Hyperlinks

A hyperlink (or "link" for short) is text that performs some action when you click it or select it and press ENTER. You can move through all the links on the page by pressing the TAB key. To see how JAWS helps you navigate links, do the following:

1.  Open the sample page Jim's Cafe at Innisport and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press U to move to the first unvisited link on the page. An unvisited link is one that leads to a page or location that you have not visited.
3.  Press V to move to the next visited link on the page. A visited link is one that you have previously activated or one that leads to a page you have visited recently.
4.  Press INSERT+F7 to display a list of all links on the page. Use the arrow keys to select "Innisport Hotel" and then press ENTER. Read the message that appears and then press ENTER.

NOTE: If the dialog box does not read automatically just press the JAWS keystroke to read the current window, INSERT+B.

5.  Press INSERT+F7 again. Select "Reputation for Quality Service" and press ALT+M to move to this link. JAWS says, "This page link," to indicate that this hyperlink will take you to another location on the current page.

JAWS Tip: The link "Reputation for Quality Service" is the start of a list of four links. Many web pages use clusters of links like this to consolidate page navigation in a single spot. If you wanted to continue reading down the page without using any of these links, you could skip over them by pressing N. The Navigation Quick Key N moves you to the next block of text that is not a link.

6.  Press INSERT+F7 again. Select "Send us an e-mail message" and press ALT+M to move to this link. JAWS says, "Send mail link," to indicate that this link allows you to send a message to an e-mail address using your default mail program.

NOTE: In addition to same page and e-mail links, another special type of link you may encounter is called an FTP link. When you move to these links, JAWS says, "FTP link." Activating an FTP link opens an FTP session that usually allows you to download files. For example, the following is an actual FTP link: Download an Accessible Chess Game. When you activate this link, the browser begins downloading a file containing an accessible chess game called WinBoard from the FTP site.

Skip to Main Content Links

Some web pages have special links with names like "Skip to Main Content" or "Skip Navigation." These same page links allow you to quickly jump past site navigation tools, such as menus, navigation bars, and so on and go directly to the important information on the page. These types of links usually appear at the beginning of the page and are often invisible to sighted users.

Lists

Web pages often contain bulleted (unordered) and numbered (ordered) lists that provide information. The procedures on this page are examples of lists. To see how JAWS navigates lists, do the following:

1.  Open the sample page Jim's Cafe at Innisport and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press L to move to the first list on the page. This is a bulleted list that contains three items.
3.  Press I to read the first item on the list. You can continue using either I or the DOWN ARROW key to read through the rest of the list. To move back through the list, use SHIFT+I or the UP ARROW key.
4.  Press L to move to the next list. This is a numbered list with four steps that explain how to locate the restaurant. Review the steps in this list with I or the arrow keys.
5.  Press I until you move to step three.
6.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the nested list within step three. This nested list is an unordered list of three bulleted items. A nested list is a list of items that is contained within a larger list. Another example of a nested list would be an outline. JAWS announces the level of nested lists.

Lists may be arranged differently depending on their purpose. Web page authors may interrupt a list with a paragraph, quote, image, or similar element. If this is the case, the next list on the page usually begins where the previous list ended. For example, if a procedure is interrupted during step three by an image, the next list on the page might begin with step four.

JAWS Tip: You can display all lists on the page by pressing INSERT+CTRL+L. You can then select a list and press ENTER to move to it. Note that the list items within each list are displayed in one single horizontal line per list within this dialog box, so you hear a lot of information when using this particular keystroke.

Headings

Web page authors use headings to divide a document into sections. Level 1 is the highest level of heading. Level 2 headings are subsections of level 1 headings. Level 3 headings are subsections of level 2 headings and so on.

Navigation Quick Keys for Headings

To see how JAWS allows you to navigate headings, do the following:

1.  Open the sample page Jim's Cafe at Innisport and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press H to move to and read the first heading on the page. JAWS says, "Jim's Cafe at Innisport." This is the only level one heading on the page. Level one headings often indicate the topic or subject of the page.
3.  Press H again until you move to the level three heading, "Poultry." Press P to read the text below this heading.
4.  Press H a few more times. You eventually reach the bottom of the page. JAWS says, "Wrapping to top," when there are no more headings. JAWS then moves you back to the first heading at the top of the document.

JAWS Tip: Don't forget that you can add SHIFT to navigation quick keys to move backward through the page. For example, press SHIFT+H to move to the previous heading.

When you reach the top of the page by using the SHIFT key in combination with navigation quick keys to move backwards through the page, JAWS announces, "Wrapping to bottom," and starts over again from the bottom of the document.

You can press ALT+INSERT+HOME to move to the first heading on the page, and press ALT+INSERT+END to move to the last heading on the page.

Using the Numbers Row to Jump to a Specific Heading Level

You can move to headings of a certain level by pressing a number between 1 and 6 as long as one or more headings of the specified level exist on the web page. To see how this works, do the following:

1.  Open the sample page Jim's Cafe at Innisport and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press 1 to move to and read the first heading on the page. JAWS says, "Jim's Cafe at Innisport." Press 1
3.  Since we've been to this page before, we know that all of the menu items are under level three headings, so we want to quickly jump to these without looking at anything else on the page. Press 3 to move to the first level three heading which is "Poultry."
4.  Did you notice that JAWS first announced the level two heading "Dishes and Appetizers" followed by the level three heading "Poultry?" There is a prior section with a level two heading called "Reputation for Quality Service" which does not contain any level three headings. Since JAWS completely skips over a section of the web page in order to reach the first level three heading, JAWS announces the higher precedence heading, in this case "Dishes and Appetizers," before announcing the "Poultry" heading so you know you have moved into a new section.
5.  Continue pressing the number 3 a few times. Did you hear JAWS announce "no next heading at level three in this section" after reaching the level three heading for Seafood?
6.  Now try pressing the number 3 with the SHIFT key to move backwards by level three headings. Did you hear JAWS announce "no prior heading at level three in this section" after reaching the level three heading for Poultry? This gives you a good idea of how the different headings relate to each other.

JAWS Tip: You can also choose to have JAWS play a sound to indicate when you move into a new section or you can restrict heading navigation using the numbers row to the current section. For example, if you attempt to move to a level three heading, but the very next heading is a level two, JAWS stops at the level two heading and will not pass it even though there may be level three headings in the next section.

To configure how JAWS navigates headings when using the numbers 1 through 6, open Settings Center, type "heading" into the Search edit box, select the "Heading Navigation Using 1-6" option, and then press SPACEBAR to choose the setting you want. Alternatively, open Quick Settings (INSERT+V) from your browser and configure the "Heading Navigation" setting.

The JAWS List of Headings

JAWS also has a list of headings that allows you to navigate by headings on a web page. You can sort this list by tab order or alphabetically. You can also view only headings of a specified level. To explore the options in this dialog box, do the following:

Open the sample page Jim's Cafe at Innisport and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.

Press INSERT+F6 to display a list of headings on this page. Press DOWN ARROW to move through the list and read the headings. If you select a heading and press ENTER, the list closes and you move directly to that heading in the document.

Press the TAB key to explore the Heading List dialog box in more detail. Each option is described below:

-   Move To Heading button - Use this button to move to the location of the currently selected heading.
-   Cancel button - Closes the list of headings without changing your location on the page.
-   Sort Headings radio buttons - Select one of these radio buttons to specify whether you want to sort the headings in this list alphabetically or by tab order.
-   Display radio buttons - Select one of these radio buttons to include only headings of the specified level in the list.

Make sure you are back in the actual list of headings. Press ALT+1 on the numbers row and read the current line by pressing INSERT+UP ARROW. You should hear that there is only one item now in the list, a level one heading.

Press ALT+2 on the numbers row and read the current line by pressing INSERT+UP ARROW. You should hear that there are now four items displayed in the list, all level two headings. In the list of headings, you can filter out all headings except the specific level you are looking for by pressing ALT and any number from 1 to 6. To view all headings again, press ALT+L.

Press ESC for now to close the list of headings.

TIP: Use the list of headings in JAWS whenever you first go to a web page to get an overview of how the page is structured.

Images

Most web pages use images to enhance their appearance, provide information, or assist with navigation. To see how JAWS handles images, do the following:

1.  Open the sample page Jim's Cafe at Innisport and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press G until you move to the level one heading, "Jim's Cafe at Innisport." You may not have noticed it earlier, but the level one heading in this document is actually an image.
3.  JAWS cannot read graphic text. The text you are hearing for this image is called alternate text. Web page authors use alternate text to describe images.
4.  Press G to move to the next image, which is a graphical link. The alternate text tells you that this is a map. On an actual page, a person might be able to click this image to open another page where the image is shown in larger size.
5.  Press ENTER to activate the graphical link. Read the message that appears and then press ALT+F4. If the dialog box does not read automatically just press the JAWS keystroke to read the current window, INSERT+B.
6.  Press INSERT+CTRL+G to display a list of all images on the page. This keystroke only works if you have JAWS running.

JAWS Tip: When you press INSERT+CTRL+G notice that the item highlighted in the list is the one that is closest to where you are currently reading on the page.

7.  Select "FS-SiteFactory Logo," which is the next image on the page, and press ENTER to move to it. There is no alternate text for this image, so JAWS reads the title attribute instead.
8.  Press G to move to the next image. It is an image of the Freedom Scientific logo. Notice the difference between the prior image and this one. This one is more than just an image; it is also a graphic link. Additionally, this link has an alt attribute instead of a title attribute describing the image. The link takes you to the Freedom Scientific home page. If you want to activate the link, press ENTER.
9.  Press G again to move to the last image on the page. This image has no alternate text or title. However, this image is a link to another page. For images like this one, JAWS announces the image's file name and tells you that the image is a link.

Tab Pages in Web Browsers

You can have several different tab pages open at once in web browsers. You can switch between the multiple tabbed pages by pressing CTRL+TAB. Use the link here for a list of keystrokes for tabbed browsing. If you are using a web browser, such as Firefox or Chrome, and you want a more complete list of the keystrokes, how would you find out what keystrokes are available to you? You can press INSERT+F1 twice quickly in any application to find the JAWS help for that application. Also, within different applications try pressing INSERT+H to open JAWS Hotkey Help for that application.

JAWS Tip: You can use PlaceMarkers with JAWS to mark spots on web pages so that you can find them again quickly. PlaceMarkers are discussed in more detail later, but they are very easy to use. Here's how to get started with PlaceMarkers:

1.  Before moving on, let's put a PlaceMarker right here. You can move right back to any spot on any web page using JAWS PlaceMarkers. Press CTRL+SHIFT+K. The PlaceMarker dialog box appears. Focus is on the Add button.
2.  Press ENTER to activate the Add button. JAWS gathers the text from where you are on the page and puts it into an edit box. You can change this by typing over it or editing it, but for now, just leave it alone and press ENTER to close the PlaceMarker dialog box.
3.  Press CTRL+HOME to go to the top of the page.
4.  Now press the navigation quick key K to move back to where you just put the PlaceMarker on this page. See how that works? Feel free to put PlaceMarkers anywhere on the Surf's Up pages as you begin using them. It makes it very easy to get back to the exact spot you want to go to.

EXERCISE: Try the following exercise for tabbed browsing now.

1.  Press TAB to move to the next link on this page, followed by CTRL+ENTER. The Jim's Cafe page loads in a new tab page in the background. Navigating Web pages is still running on a tab page in the foreground. Jim's Cafe at Innisport
2.  Press CTRL+TAB a few times to move between the two pages.
3.  Next, press CTRL+TAB to move back to the Jim's Cafe page and spend a minute reading through it. When you are finished, press CTRL+TAB to move back to the Navigating page.
4.  Next, if you are using Firefox or Internet Explorer, press ALT+F4 but don't go beyond that. If you only had one tab page open ALT+F4 would close that page and the whole browser window. Instead, since there are multiple tab pages open, you should get a message from the browser asking "Do you want to close all tabs?" Since you DO have multiple tab pages open, the browser gives you this prompt.
5.  Press ESC to get out of this dialog box.

NOTE: Currently, when you press ALT+F4 in Chrome and multiple tabs are opened, the browser closes without displaying a prompt and all pages will be closed.

5.  Press CTRL+TAB a couple of times to make sure you are on the Jim's Cafe page.
6.  Now press CTRL+F4 to close just that page. Focus returns to the Navigating Web page.

NOTE: It is still possible to have multiple instances of each web browser running and each instance can have multiple tabs. If you have two or more different browser sessions running you can press ALT+TAB to move from one session to another. For example, many of the sample pages for Surf's Up run in separate windows, not as tabbed pages.

Navigation Quick Key Manager

Navigation Quick Key manager is used to view, edit, or delete Navigation Quick Key assignments. To open Navigation Quick Key manager do the following:

1.  Press INSERT+J to switch to the JAWS window.
2.  From within the JAWS window press ALT+U to open the Utilities menu.
3.  Press N to open the Navigation Quick Key manager submenu. Focus moves to the first item of three, HTML/PDF.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move through the other two items. You find one for Microsoft Word and one for Microsoft Outlook.

NOTE: You can also find Navigation Quick Key Manager in the list of JAWS managers by pressing INSERT+F2.

ARIA and Regions

ARIA (Accessible Rich Internet Applications) regions can be used to add additional navigation structure to web pages. Web page authors can add regions to web pages to make it easier to find the main parts of a page. For example, you might find a main region which is where the main content of a page begins. You may also find banner, navigation, and search regions on some web pages. When a web page loads, JAWS announces if there are regions on the page. Use the keystroke R to move forward from one region to another. Press SHIFT+R to move backward from one region to another. You may also use the keystroke INSERT+CTRL+R to open a JAWS list of regions for a web page.

The Surf's Up home page has three regions. There is a "main" region which begins near the top of the page. The main region is typically where the primary content of most web pages begins, and should be after, or below, the links that one typically finds near the top of the page for navigation to other parts of the web site. The Surf's Up home page and the remaining pages of Surf's Up also have a "content information" region. The content information region on most web sites, including Surf's Up, is typically the footer of the page and may contain more links and copyright information. We've kept the footer of Surf's Up pretty clean and empty of extra content for now. Finally, on the home page of Surf's Up only, there is a "navigation" region that contains links for just that, navigating to different parts of the Surf's Up web site.

1.  Press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the current page.
2.  Press R to move to the different regions on the page. Regions are not visible on the screen, but they are used to make it easy to get from one part of the page to another. The main region is where the main text for the page begins. Regions designate the different broad categories on the page, such as the search region, the banner region, and more.
3.  Try pressing INSERT+CTRL+R to open a JAWS list of regions.
4.  Use the Surf's Up link at the top of any of the secondary pages of Surf's Up to move back to the Surf's Up home page and try these keystrokes there as well.
5.  Press ENTER on the main region in the list. JAWS moves focus directly to that part of the page.

Many web sites have a graphic company logo, which is also a link, at the top of their web pages to make it easier for you to get back to their home page. Surf's Up mimics this behavior so you can practice using it as well. At the top of every page in Surf's Up besides the home page is a graphic link that simply reads, "Surf's Up." It is a small thumbnail image of a shark's fin which is also a link to the Surf's Up home page.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, temporary changes, permanent changes, Quick Settings, Settings Center’ lang: en title: Temporary Versus Permanent Changes —

[Surf's Up]

Temporary Versus Permanent Changes

With JAWS you have the flexibility to make changes quickly that are temporary, or you can make changes that stay in effect permanently. Throughout the exercises in Surf's Up - Surfing the Internet with JAWS you will encounter some of these differences, which are described below.

JAWS Quick Settings

Use the Quick Settings dialog box to make changes very quickly without having to go into various other dialog boxes to do so. There are three different types of changes that can be made in the Quick Settings dialog box:

-   Temporary changes that revert back to normal settings as soon as focus switches to another program window.
-   Temporary changes that revert back to normal settings when JAWS is closed and restarted.
-   Permanent changes that stay in effect until you change them again at some other time. (This is the default setting.)

When you press INSERT+V to open the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box, the items at the top of this list are specific to the program that has focus when the keystroke is pressed. So pressing INSERT+V while in Chrome shows options specific to reading web pages, whereas the items near the bottom of the list are more generic. This is very handy for making quick changes for testing or reading purposes.

NOTE: Quick Settings are used to make changes that are application-specific. If you wish to make global changes to all programs, use Settings Center.

Documentation for the JAWS Quick Settings Dialog Box

The JAWS Quick Settings dialog box has a tree view of different options that can be changed, depending on the program being used. There is also a read-only documentation area within the dialog box that describes what each option does. To move to and read the documentation for any given item, select the item and press the TAB key to move to the read-only edit area and use normal reading commands to read the text describing what that option does.

Persistency in JAWS Quick Settings

Here are a couple of examples showing how having different persistency levels might benefit you:

-   A friend is using your computer for a few minutes and her preferences are different than yours. She uses a different verbosity level and typing echo. You can set it so that JAWS is changed for her only as long as that session is open and running. When she hands you back your computer, just shut down and restart JAWS and your settings are back to normal.
-   You are downloading a large file and you want the progress bar announcements to be silent. Normally progress bar announcements are spoken. In this example you could set the persistence level so that the progress bar is only silent while focus remains in that window. As soon as you switch to a different window or program, progress bar announcements return to normal.

NOTE: The persistency level cannot be set for individual document settings. Document settings will always be written to disk.

By default, every change you make in Quick Settings gets saved to disk. This means that the changes you make will still be set the next time you quit and restart JAWS. It also means that the changes you make will still be set the next time you shut down and restart your computer. But what if you want the changes to be temporary and not permanent?

Press INSERT+V in Chrome to open the Quick Settings dialog box. Focus is in the search edit box.

Press TAB to move to the tree view. The first thing you notice is a node for Virtual Cursor options.

Press DOWN ARROW to explore the items beneath this node.

Press the APPLICATION Key or SHIFT+F10 to open a context menu for any of these items. You should find the following choices in the context menu:

-   Restore setting when JAWS exits
-   Restore setting when focus changes
-   Save the setting (checked). This is the default for all items.

There is also a graphic icon out to the left of each item in the tree view showing an image representing save to disk. If you change to one of the other settings, the icon changes accordingly to a different icon. This option in Quick Settings gives you the ability to make temporary changes if you wish to. Personally, the author believes it is best for most JAWS users to leave everything set to the default, which is save to disk. Let's take a look at one more item.

If you closed Quick Settings, reopen it from Chrome with INSERT+V.

Press DOWN ARROW to move to the node for Virtual Cursor options. What if there were many different items beneath this node that had been changed? Perhaps some were set to restore settings when JAWS exits, some were set to restore settings when focus changes, and some were set to save all settings. Wouldn't it be easier to change them all at once instead of having to change them each individually?

While focus is on a node of the tree you can press the APPLICATION Key or SHIFT+F10 to open a context menu that controls the settings of every item within that node. Try it and you should find the following items in the context menu:

-   Restore all settings for this node when JAWS exits
-   Restore all settings for this node when focus changes
-   Save all settings for this node

As you can see, this gives you as a JAWS user a lot of flexibility and control over how JAWS saves different settings. For most people the default setting, save to disk, is probably the best choice.

Settings Center in JAWS

The JAWS Settings Center allows you to make permanent changes to the way JAWS behaves on the Web, or in other programs. Settings Center provides a consistent interface and central access point for JAWS features and settings.

1.  Press INSERT+F2 in Chrome, the JAWS List of Managers appears.
2.  Press S until you find Settings Center, then press ENTER to open it. Focus is in the search edit box. Press TAB to move to the tree view. The tree view is where the major categories for changing settings are grouped. Press UP or DOWN ARROW to move up and down the tree view. Press RIGHT ARROW to open a closed group, and press LEFT ARROW to close an open group. You may also use first letter navigation to move to items in the tree view as long as they are not hidden inside of one of the closed groups.
3.  Do not make any changes at this time. Just explore the dialog box. Press DOWN ARROW and notice that one of the groups says "Web / HTML / PDFs" closed.
4.  Press RIGHT ARROW to open this group. Notice that there are several items within this group. You can explore them if you want by pressing DOWN ARROW. Also notice that many of these items are closed, meaning there are more options within each of them.

NOTE: Pressing SPACEBAR on most items in the tree will toggle through the available choices for that item. Do not change anything at this time. At the end of this exercise we will choose the Cancel button just to make sure.

5.  Press TAB. Focus moves to a read only text area. This is where the help topic for the item you just moved from in the tree is found. Use standard reading commands such as INSERT+DOWN ARROW to read all of the text or UP and DOWN ARROW to read the text by lines.
6.  Press TAB again. If you made any changes before moving here, focus moves to an Apply button. If focus moves to the Apply button do NOT activate it at this time. Instead, go ahead and press TAB once more to move to the OK button. Do NOT activate the OK button at this time either.
7.  Press TAB once more and focus moves to the Cancel button. You will activate this in a few minutes, but first continue to explore the dialog box.
8.  Press TAB again. Focus moves to the Application combo box. Notice that since you were on a Web page when you opened Settings Center, the application highlighted in the combo box is Chrome. Settings Center always shows the name of the program you were in when it opens. For example, if you had been in Notepad when Settings Center opened, this combo box would say Notepad. That is because this gives you the ability to make changes that only affect the one program you were in when you started Settings Center. Sometimes you want to make changes to all programs, however.
9.  Press HOME to move to the top of the list of items in the combo box. Notice that it says Default (All Applications). You don't have to move to the combo box to choose Default, however. If you want to switch to the Default settings just press CTRL+SHIFT+D when Settings Center opens.
10. Press TAB again. Focus moves to the search edit box for Settings Center. The keystroke to jump here quickly is CTRL+E. This is a great tool to help you find settings quickly and easily in JAWS. Typing a search word or phrase in the edit box reduces the number of items that appear in the tree view list. Other exercises coming later in Surf's Up will give you opportunities to experiment more with this and other features of JAWS Settings Center. The search edit box is where the focus appears whenever you start Settings Center.
11. Press TAB once more and focus returns to the tree view.
12. One more part of Settings Center is the configuration display pane. As you move through the tree view, a sighted user can simultaneously track cursor movement using the configuration display pane. Press F6 to switch between the tree view and this pane. This is necessary when typing in an edit or edit spin box. Press F6 again to return to the tree view.
13. For now, go ahead and press TAB to move to the Cancel button, and then activate it by pressing SPACEBAR. Settings Center closes and any changes you might have made are not saved.

Tip: You can press INSERT+F1 on an option in any JAWS dialog box to find out more information about that option.

Last Changed Settings

In both Settings Center and the Quick Settings dialog boxes there is an item at the bottom of the tree view called "Last Changed Settings." This group contains the last 25 options that were recently changed for an application or document. Note that once this group has 25 items, the last setting in the list is deleted when another item is added. To remove an item from the list, select it, press SHIFT+F10, and then select Remove. To remove all items from the list, select the Last Changed Settings group in the tree view, press SHIFT+F10, and then select Remove All.

Location of JAWS Settings Files

JAWS stores settings files in your user files location for the version of Windows® you are using. Settings files are stored in C:\Users\username\AppData\Roaming\Freedom Scientific\JAWS\version\settings\enu. The file extension used is JCF, which stands for JAWS Configuration File.

The word username in the path above represents your user login name for your computer. The word version in the path above represents the version of JAWS you are using.

To quickly find your user settings files, open the Utilities menu from the JAWS window, select the Explore Utilities Folder option, and then choose Explore My Settings.

Other ways to make permanent changes for JAWS include:

-   Choose an item (including Settings Center) from one of the menus in the JAWS user interface.
-   Choose another JAWS manager from the list of JAWS managers (INSERT+F2).

Personalized Web Page Settings with JAWS

If you want to make changes that are permanent, but only for a specific Web site, you can use the JAWS list of Personalized Settings for Web Pages. This is discussed in more detail later in Surf's up-Surfing the Internet with JAWS.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘web pages, web verbosity, JAWS, verbosity levels, virtual cursor’ lang: en title: JAWS Web Verbosity —

[Surf's Up]

JAWS Web Verbosity

When reading content using the Virtual Cursor, JAWS alerts you to the beginning and end of various elements such as lists, tables, and regions. With JAWS support for ARIA continuing to improve and web developers becoming more aware of accessible design, the amount of extra information provided by the Virtual Cursor can become overwhelming when you just want to focus on the page content. To make it easier to determine what is spoken, JAWS now offers three levels of verbosity for the Virtual Cursor, giving you control over how much detail you want to hear when reading various web content. The three levels are:

-   High - JAWS speaks the most information about elements on the page or inside a document. Everything except the start and end of application and document regions is announced at this level.
-   Medium - This level is configured to provide the best user experience on most pages and documents and is the default verbosity level. By default, JAWS will not indicate the start and end for flash objects or frames, and only the start and end of navigation and main regions is announced. Note that the name and type for all regions is still announced when using the R and SHIFT+R Navigation Quick Keys to move by region or the O and SHIFT+O Navigation Quick Keys to move by article.
-   Low - JAWS speaks as little structural information as possible about the elements on a page or inside a document. By default, only the start and end of tables and grids is announced at this level.

To choose a verbosity level, do the following:

1.  Press INSERT+F2, and select Settings Center. Note that since you started Settings Center while Google Chrome web browser had focus, the title bar of Settings Center reads, "JAWS Settings Center - Chrome." This means this setting will only apply when using Chrome. Should you wish to apply this setting to all web browsers, one would first press the keystroke CTRL+SHIFT+D to change to the default settings before continuing the exercise.
2.  In the Search edit box, type "web verbosity" without the quotes.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to "Web Verbosity Level" in the filtered search results in the tree view.
4.  Press SPACEBAR to choose the level you want.
5.  Press ENTER to save your change and close Settings Center.

You can also choose a Virtual Cursor verbosity level to be active for a specific website. From the website where you want to use a different verbosity level, press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings, navigate to the Personalized Web Settings group, and press SPACEBAR on Virtual Cursor Verbosity Level to choose the verbosity level you want for the current site.

Each verbosity level is preset to provide the most optimal experience. However, just like with speech verbosity, each level can be further customized to give only the information you want to hear. For example, you may want to continue using the default Medium verbosity level, but you may want JAWS to announce a few more elements that are not spoken by default at this level.

Change Web Verbosity to Look for More at Medium Verbosity Level - Practice

EXERCISE: Configure JAWS to announce the Content Information region at the bottom of each Surf's Up page as you navigate with the arrow keys. Content Information regions are not indicated by default at the Medium verbosity level.

1.  Press INSERT+F2, and select Settings Center.
2.  In the Search edit box, type "web verbosity" without the quotes.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to "Configure Web Verbosity Levels" in the filtered search results in the tree view and press ENTER.
4.  Press RIGHT ARROW to expand the "Configure Web Verbosity Levels" group.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Medium and press SPACEBAR. A dialog box opens containing a tree view listing the structural elements that can be announced by the Virtual Cursor.

Tip: Pressing TAB one time moves you to a read-only text area containing a description of the currently selected element in the tree view.

6.  You can use the arrow keys to explore all of the items in this tree view or press R to jump directly to the Regions node.
7.  Press DOWN ARROW until you reach Content Information and press SPACEBAR to check this region type.
8.  Press ENTER to activate the OK button. Focus returns to Settings Center.
9.  Press ALT+A to activate the Apply button in Settings Center. Activating the Apply button allows you to make instant changes to settings without having to close the Settings Center dialog box. That way we can change the setting back in just a minute without having to re-open Settings Center.

Now, press ALT+TAB to return to the JAWS Web Verbosity page. Settings Center is still running in the background and is still open. Press DOWN ARROW until you hear JAWS say "Main Region End." Continue pressing DOWN ARROW and you should hear JAWS say "Content Information," followed by the Back and Next links, and finally "Content Information End."

Repeat this exercise if you want to try selecting or clearing other elements that you may or may not want to have announced as you navigate pages.

Change Web Verbosity Back to Default Setting

1.  Press ALT+TAB to switch back to Settings Center.
2.  This time, let's use the Last Changed Settings item in Settings Center to revert the change. Press END to move to the bottom of the tree view in Settings Center. JAWS should announce it as "Last Changed Settings, closed."
3.  Press RIGHT ARROW to open the tree node, and then press DOWN ARROW to move to "Medium... (Web / HTML / PDFs ,Reading,Configure Web Verbosity Levels)."
4.  Press SPACEBAR to reopen the dialog box containing a tree view listing the structural elements that can be announced by the Virtual Cursor.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW until you reach Content Information and press SPACEBAR to uncheck this region type.
6.  Press ENTER to activate the OK button. Focus returns to Settings Center.
7.  Finally, press ENTER once more to close Settings Center.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘JAWS, document presentation mode, simple layout, screen layout’ lang: en title: ‘Screen layout Mode Step-by-step Instructions’ —

Do the following to enable Screen Layout mode in your web browser:

1.  In the web browser, press INSERT+V. The Quick Settings dialog box opens with focus in the search edit box.
2.  Type document presentation in the search edit box. The tree view below filters out everything that does not relate to document presentation.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW until focus moves to Document Presentation Mode.
4.  Press the SPACEBAR to choose Screen Layout.
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then press SPACEBAR to activate it.

NOTE: By default, the quick settings for JAWS are saved to your computer hard disk, and remain set this way until you change them back or to a different setting.

If you determine that Screen Layout mode is better suited to your needs for all programs, you can do the following to permanently enable this feature globally:

1.  In the web browser, press INSERT+F2.
2.  Select Settings Center and press ENTER.
3.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+D to switch to the default file.
4.  Focus is in the Search edit box. Type in "select layout" without the quotes.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Select Layout in the filtered results of the tree view in Settings Center.
6.  Press SPACEBAR to toggle from Simple Layout to Screen Layout.
7.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved. Settings Center closes.

Press CTRL+F4 to close this window when you are finished reading it. ﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘tables, table layer, table reading keystrokes, JAWS, table layer commands’ lang: en title: Table Reading Commands for JAWS —

Table Reading Commands for JAWS

The sections below include the table layer keystrokes as well as classic table keystrokes. You may use either or both with the latest versions of JAWS.

Table Layer Reading Commands

Table layer keystrokes offer a fast and convenient way to navigate tables. The table layer eliminates the need to hold down several keys at once to perform a table navigation command.

Below is a list of the layered keystrokes for table navigation. Press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, followed by T to get to the table layer. Then press any of the following keystrokes.

Table Layer Reading Commands

Description

Command

List the keystrokes you can use in this layer

QUESTION MARK (?)

Move to cell above, below, left, or right

ARROW Keys

Say current cell

NUM PAD 5

Move to the beginning of the current row

HOME

Move to the end of the current row

END

Move to the first cell in a table

CTRL+HOME

Move to the last cell in a table

CTRL+END

Move to the top of the current column

CONTROL+UP ARROW

Move to the bottom of the current column

CONTROL+DOWN ARROW

Move to next table

CONTROL+ENTER

Move to prior table

CONTROL+SHIFT+ENTER

Read the current row

SHIFT+UP ARROW

Read from the current cell to the end of the row

SHIFT+PAGE UP

Read from beginning of the row to the current cell

SHIFT+HOME

Read the current column

SHIFT+NUM PAD 5

Read from the current cell to the bottom of the column

SHIFT+PAGE DOWN

Read from the top of the column to the current cell

SHIFT+END

Classic Table Reading Commands

The following is a list of JAWS commands for reading information contained in a table.

Classic Table Reading Commands

Description

Command

Move to Next Table

T

Move to Prior Table

SHIFT+T

List Tables

CTRL+INSERT+T

Jump to Table Cell

CTRL+WINDOWS Key+J

Return to Previous Cell

CTRL+SHIFT+WINDOWS Key+J

Current Cell

CTRL+ALT+NUM PAD 5

Next Cell

CTRL+ALT+RIGHT ARROW

Prior Cell

CTRL+ALT+LEFT ARROW

Cell Above

CTRL+ALT+UP ARROW

Cell Below

CTRL+ALT+DOWN ARROW

First Cell

CTRL+ALT+HOME

Last Cell

CTRL+ALT+END

Next Row

WINDOWS KEY+ALT+DOWN ARROW

Prior Row

WINDOWS KEY+ALT+UP ARROW

Current Row

WINDOWS Key+NUM PAD 5

Prior Column

WINDOWS Key+ALT+LEFT ARROW

Current Column

WINDOWS Key+PERIOD

Next Column

WINDOWS Key+ALT+RIGHT ARROW

Read Row to Cell

INSERT+SHIFT+HOME

Read Row from Cell

INSERT+SHIFT+PAGE UP

Read Column to Cell

INSERT+SHIFT+END

Read Column from Cell

INSERT+SHIFT+PAGE DOWN

To close this page, press CTRL+F4. ﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, tables, table layer, selecting tables, document presentation mode, simple layout, screen layout’ lang: en title: Tables with JAWS —

[Surf's Up]

HTML Tables with JAWS

A Web page author can use tables in two primary ways on the Internet. One is for the layout of structure on a Web page to place items where the author wants them to be in relation to other items on the page. These are called layout tables. The other type of table is called a data table. Data tables are the most common type of table.

JAWS announces when you enter and leave a table. A well-designed HTML table has a few different features. One of these is a caption, which is visible to a sighted user and is also read by JAWS. The caption is usually like a title, and generally appears above the table. Another design feature is the table summary. The table summary is not visible on the screen to sighted users. Web page designers can add summaries to the HTML code specifically for screen reader users. A good table summary provides a meaningful overview of the table, giving you some idea of what the table contains before you get there. Pay particular attention to the table summaries as you read through this page.

Reading Tables

You can use the JAWS navigation quick key T to move quickly between tables. On this page, each table also has a caption that is a level two heading. You can also move among the headings by pressing the JAWS navigation quick key H for headings. If you want to list all tables on the page, press INSERT+CTRL+T. You can then select a table and press ENTER to move to it.

Once you enter a table, you can use table reading commands to move through and read the information.

Table Layer Keystrokes

Table layer keystrokes offer a fast and convenient way to navigate tables. The table layer eliminates the need to have to hold down several keys at once to perform a table navigation command.

Below is a list of the layered keystrokes for table navigation. Press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, followed by T to get to the table layer. Then press any of the following keystrokes.

-   H or QUESTION MARK (?), list the keystrokes you can use in this layer
-   ARROW Keys, move to cell above, below, left, or right
-   NUM PAD 5, say current cell
-   HOME, move to the beginning of the current row
-   END, move to the end of the current row
-   CTRL+HOME, move to the first cell in a table
-   CTRL+END, move to the last cell in a table
-   CONTROL+UP ARROW, move to the top of the current column
-   CONTROL+DOWN ARROW, move to the bottom of the current column
-   CONTROL+LEFT ARROW, move to the beginning of the current row
-   CONTROL+RIGHT ARROW, move to the end of the current row
-   CONTROL+ENTER, move to next table
-   CONTROL+SHIFT+ENTER, move to prior table
-   SHIFT+UP ARROW, read the current row
-   SHIFT+PAGE UP, read from the current cell to the end of the row
-   SHIFT+HOME, read from beginning of the row to the current cell
-   SHIFT+NUM PAD 5, read the current column
-   SHIFT+PAGE DOWN, read from the current cell to the bottom of the column
-   SHIFT+END, read from the top of the column to the current cell

The Table Layer remains active until you press a key that does not perform a table command, such as ESC, SPACEBAR, TAB, or ENTER.

The default behavior for JAWS is to read only headers that have been properly marked as headers by the author of a table.

In many tables, the first row, going from left to right, contains headers for the information in the columns below it. Also, many times the first column, going up and down, contains headers for the information in the rows to the right. If a table is not properly coded, JAWS can be changed to treat the information in the first row and the first column as headers. The settings for JAWS are as follows:

-   Only Marked Headers (default)
-   Off
-   Row
-   Column
-   Both Row and Column

If a table has been properly marked up with column and row headers, when moving left and right in a table, you would hear the item in each column at the top of the column and then the contents of the current cell. When moving up and down in a table, you hear the item at the beginning of each row and then the contents of the current cell.

JAWS looks at the HTML code to see if the author of an HTML table has coded the table cell with a <TH> element, or table header. In addition, JAWS looks for the scope attribute, which can also be used by document authors to provide header information in tables. If a table is not specifically coded with proper column and row headers, JAWS can be changed to treat the table as if it did.

In the first two tables below you find examples of column and row headers that are marked up as headers. The first table has properly coded <TH> table header tags for both the first row and the first column. However, the second table only has properly coded <TH> table header tags for the first row. There are no row headers in the second table example. However, because these first two tables are marked up properly, JAWS reads the header information just fine.

In this first table the author used table headers for both the first row and the first column of the table, so when you use JAWS reading commands to read the current cell, you hear the following information:

-   Column and row position in the table
-   Column header (time)
-   Row header (network)
-   TV show listing from the cell where the cursor currently is located

NOTE: If you are not in table layer mode, press and release INSERT+SPACEBAR, and then press T. Then press NUM PAD 5 to read the current cell.

TV Listings with Both Column and Row Headers

8:00 PM

8:30 PM

9:00 PM

9:30 PM

10:00 PM

10:30 PM

ABC

Grey's Anatomy

Scandal

How to Get Away with Murder

CBS

The Big Bang Theory

Mom

Two and a Half Men

The McCarthys

Elementary

FOX

Bones

Gracepoint

Local Programming

NBC

The Biggest Loser

Bad Judge

A to Z

Parenthood

In the second table the author used table headers for only the first row. The station network names have been omitted from column one. In this case when you use JAWS reading commands to read the current cell you hear the following information:

-   Column and row position in the table
-   Column header (time)
-   TV show listing from the cell where the cursor currently is located

TV Listings with Only Column Headers

8:00 PM

8:30 PM

9:00 PM

9:30 PM

10:00 PM

10:30 PM

Grey's Anatomy

Scandal

How to Get Away with Murder

The Big Bang Theory

Mom

Two and a Half Men

The McCarthys

Elementary

Bones

American Idol

Fox 5 News at 10

The Biggest Loser

Bad Judge

A to Z

Parenthood

The third table is just like the first table, except the author did NOT use table headers to mark up the HTML. In this case, you can change JAWS to read them.

TV Listings with Column and Row Headers that are not Marked up Properly

8:00 PM

8:30 PM

9:00 PM

9:30 PM

10:00 PM

10:30 PM

ABC

Grey's Anatomy

Scandal

How to Get Away with Murder

CBS

The Big Bang Theory

Mom

Two and a Half Men

The McCarthys

Elementary

FOX

Bones

Gracepoint

Local Programming

NBC

The Biggest Loser

Bad Judge

A to Z

Parenthood

EXERCISE: Follow the steps below to tell JAWS to read both column and row headers for the table above that does not have proper markup:

1.  Press INSERT+V to open the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box while the Tables page is still in the foreground. The Quick Settings dialog box opens with focus in the search edit box.
2.  Type table titles in the edit box. The tree view below filters out all items not related to table titles.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the item Table Titles in the tree view. You should hear JAWS announce "Only Marked Headers."
4.  Press SPACEBAR to change this to Table Titles - Both Row and Column
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. The Quick Settings dialog box closes.
6.  Navigate to the table above and try reading it again. You can press SHIFT+T to move to the prior table. Does it make more sense this time?
7.  Set the Quick Settings back to Table Titles Announce - Only Marked Headers again when you are finished.

The fourth table has only the times listed across the top. The network names that were in the first column have been removed. Again, the author did NOT use table headers to mark up the HTML. When you read the current cell you hear only the following information:

-   Column and row position in the table
-   TV show listing from the current cell

Because the table is not marked up properly, JAWS does not read the column headers.

TV Listings with Only Column Headers that are not Marked Up Properly

8:00 PM

8:30 PM

9:00 PM

9:30 PM

10:00 PM

10:30 PM

Grey's Anatomy

Scandal

How to Get Away with Murder

The Big Bang Theory

Mom

Two and a Half Men

The McCarthys

Elementary

Bones

Gracepoint

Local Programming

The Biggest Loser

Bad Judge

A to Z

Parenthood

When you encounter this type of table you can change how JAWS reads column and row headers. In this case, you know that the information in row one, at the top of each column, is header information, even though it is not properly marked up. You also know that you do NOT want to have the first column treated as row headers.

EXERCISE: Follow the steps below to tell JAWS to read only column headers for the table above that does not have proper markup:

1.  Press INSERT+V to open the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box while the Tables page is still in the foreground. The Quick Settings dialog box opens with focus in the search edit box.
2.  Type table titles in the edit box. The tree view below filters out all items not related to table titles.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the item Table Titles in the tree view. You should hear JAWS announce "Only Marked Headers."
4.  Press SPACEBAR to change this to Table Titles - Columns
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. The Quick Settings dialog box closes.
6.  Navigate to the table above and try reading it again. You can press SHIFT+T to move to the prior table. Does it make more sense this time?
7.  Set the JAWS Quick Settings Option back to Table Titles Announce - Only Marked Headers again when you are finished.

Document Presentation Mode

There are two different document presentation modes that you can use when reading tables with JAWS: Simple Layout and Screen Layout. With Simple Layout, each cell of the table is displayed on a separate line in the virtual buffer. Screen Layout mode allows you to read tables by row, just as they are presented on the screen. With Screen Layout each row of the table is displayed on a separate line and each cell is separated by a vertical bar. This lets you get a much better idea about how the table is structured and how different cells in a row relate to each other.

Screen Layout mode is also helpful when you want to copy an entire table row and paste it into another document as a single line. The default document presentation mode for JAWS is Simple Layout.

To enable Screen Layout mode for the current web browser, do the following:

1.  In your browser, press INSERT+V. The Quick Settings dialog box opens with focus in the search edit box.
2.  Type document presentation in the search edit box. The tree view below filters out everything that does not relate to document presentation.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW until focus moves to Document Presentation Mode.
4.  Press the SPACEBAR to choose Screen Layout.
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then SPACEBAR to activate it.

NOTE: By default, the quick settings for JAWS are saved to your computer hard disk, and remain set this way until you change them back or to a different setting.

When you practice reading tables with JAWS in the following section, experiment with Screen Layout mode and Simple Layout mode to see which you like best.

Permanently Enable Screen Layout Mode for all HTML and PDF Tables

If you determine that Screen Layout mode is better suited to your needs, you can do the following to permanently enable this feature in HTML and PDF tables.

1.  In your browser, press INSERT+F2.
2.  Select Settings Center and press ENTER.
3.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+D to switch to the Default, all files, setting. You can read the title bar of Settings Center to verify this by pressing INSERT+T.
4.  Focus is in the Search edit box. Type in "select layout" without the quotes.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Select Layout in the filtered results of the tree view in Settings Center.
6.  Press SPACEBAR to toggle from Simple Layout to Screen Layout.
7.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved. Settings Center closes.

Practice with More Tables

The next table on this page discusses air and water temperatures for the Tampa Bay area. The Tampa Bay area enjoys an average of 361 days of sunshine a year. The Guinness Book of World records credits Saint Petersburg with the longest run of consecutive sunny days: 768. All the sunshine makes it easy to enjoy the area's beaches, which include two of the top ten rated beaches in the nation.

Average Temperatures for Saint Petersburg

Month

High Air Temperature

Low Air Temperature

Gulf Water Temperature

January

70 degrees

50 degrees

64 degrees

February

71 degrees

51 degrees

65 degrees

March

77 degrees

58 degrees

69 degrees

April

81 degrees

61 degrees

73 degrees

May

88 degrees

67 degrees

79 degrees

June

89 degrees

71 degrees

82 degrees

July

90 degrees

75 degrees

84 degrees

August

90 degrees

75 degrees

86 degrees

September

89 degrees

73 degrees

82 degrees

October

82 degrees

65 degrees

78 degrees

November

78 degrees

56 degrees

71 degrees

December

72 degrees

50 degrees

64 degrees

The information above is taken from the Chamber of Commerce Web site in SaintPetersburg.

EXERCISE: Try re-reading the previous table using Screen Layout mode instead of Simple Layout mode. If you need a reminder about how to switch document presentation modes, see the steps for switching to Screen Layout mode. When you are finished, change JAWS back to Simple Layout mode.

Surf's Up also makes use of cascading style sheets (CSS) for formatting purposes. Using CSS is a best practice technique for Web designers and is the best way to accomplish formatting. One of the formatting techniques used in Surf's Up is to have cells that are classified as table header elements colored with a lemon yellow background, which is darker than the ivory background of the other table cells.

The table below is an example of a table that uses the ID, AXIS, and HEADERS attributes to make JAWS speak different information when navigating different areas of the table. For example, when moving up and down the Employee Name column, you hear the division name as the row header. However, when moving up and down the Phone Extension column, you hear the employee name as the row header. The employee name is actually in column two, but the HTML code is telling JAWS to treat it as the row header in this case, rather than the text in column one. In this case, JAWS reads properly without you having to change any settings for JAWS, since the author of the table took the time to use good practices for coding the HTML of the table. Any given cell can reference any other cell (or cells) anywhere in the table as a header using this technique.

Employee Extensions and Departments

Division Name

Employee Name

Phone Extension

Shipping

John Smith

543

Receiving

Lee Johnson

123

Accounting

Sharon Jones

222

This next table is much more complex, but notice how JAWS reads it. When moving up and down column two, where the company name is, the row header information is gathered from column one, the region. When moving up or down any column from three to eight, the row header information is gathered from column two, the company name. You also hear the axis attribute spoken with the words "Region" and "Where."

Sales Contacts by State

 

Company

Address

City

State

Phone Number

Fax

Products

West

Screen Readers Unlimited

52 Third Ave.

Los Angeles

CA

555-555-1234

949-555-0101

Screen Readers

Access Now

115 Webb Street

Seattle

WA

206-555-7777

206-555-7778

Software; Braille Displays; Embossers; Notetakers

Webb Access Group

100 Main Street

Phoenix

AZ

602-555-3131

602-555-3132

Software; Web Accessibility Consulting

Accessible World

5 N. 7th Street

San Francisco

CA

1-800-555-2190

 

Software; Braille Displays; Embossers; Notetakers

Midwest

Special Computers, Inc.

121 4th Street, Suite I

Chicago

IL

800-555-1478

708-555-2221

Software; Braille Displays; Embossers; Notetakers

IndyPendence Day Computing

2110 Freedom Dr.

Indianapolis

IN

1-800-555-1332

317-555-6261

Software; Braille Displays; Embossers; Notetakers

Touch the World, Inc.

82 S. Broadway

Cincinnati

OH

1-800-555-3691

513-555-2221

Software; Braille Displays; Embossers; Notetakers

In the following table, the first row actually spans the entire width of the table, across all five columns. JAWS uses the COLSPAN and SCOPE attributes to determine how it should read the information in the table. Try reading this table now.

Sales Report

Produce On Sale

 

First Week

Second Week

Third Week

Fourth Week

January

Apples

Pears

Oranges

Grapes

February

Mangos

Tangerines

Strawberries

Kiwis

March

Cherries

Limes

Lemons

Melons

Back          Next

﻿— description: This page demonstrates the use of forms with JAWS. keywords: ‘web pages, accessibility, JAWS, screen readers, Freedom Scientific, forms, context help’ lang: en title: The Web Track Sample Call Tracking System —

The Web Track Sample Form

Online Customer Tracking System

+————————————————————————————+ | Contact Information | | | | First *    Middle    Last * | | | |   | | | | Area Code    Prefix    Number | | | |   | | | | E-Mail Address * | | | |   | | | |    | | | | * Required fields | | | |   | | | | Account Information | | | | Order Number | | | | Account Number | | | |   | | | | Ordered Products | | | | JAWS®  | | Fusion  | | ZoomText  | | | |   | | | | Product(s) in Warranty | | | | Yes  | | No | | | |   | | | | Current Call | | | | Action Taken Sale Hardware Issue Software Issue Product Refund Replace Product | | | | Notes  | | | |    | | | |   | | | | Receive Marketing Promotions by | | | | Phone  | | E-mail  | | Mail  | | Company Newsletter | +————————————————————————————+ ﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, forms, forms mode, auto forms mode, semi-auto forms mode’ lang: en title: Using Forms with JAWS —

[Surf's Up]

Using Forms with JAWS

HTML forms allow you to access shopping carts, search engines, web-based email, online forums, and more. Forms include controls such as edit boxes, check boxes, radio buttons, combo boxes, and other controls similar to those used in dialog boxes.

JAWS takes advantage of the features of HTML used to create forms and allows you to access all kinds of form controls.

Moving Through Forms

The following is a list of JAWS navigation quick key commands that allow you to move quickly from one control to another. You can use the SHIFT key in combination with many of the keystrokes to move to the previous unit or element.

  Description                    Command
  ------------------------------ ------------------
  Button                         B
  Combo Box                      C
  Edit Box                       E
  Form Control (generic)         F
  Radio Button                   A
  Check Box                      X
  First Form Control on a Page   INSERT+CTRL+HOME
  Last Form Control on a Page    INSERT+CTRL+END

NOTE: These commands do not work in forms mode.

You can also display lists of specific types of form controls. To do this, hold down INSERT+CTRL and press one of the navigation quick keys for moving through forms. For example, to view a list of all edit boxes on the page, press INSERT+CTRL+E.

To quickly locate a specific form control press INSERT+F5. This command lists all form controls and their contents on the current page. Move through the list and press ENTER to move to the selected control. Forms mode is automatically enabled so you are ready to make changes to the control. And if you have already entered information in a long form, use the Forms List to quickly review the information.

TIP: Forms mode is automatically turned off when you activate a button that submits a form.

EXERCISE: Open the Web Track Sample Form and press INSERT+F5 to list all the form controls, and experience how easy it is to review the information. Try pressing ENTER from the list of form controls to go into forms mode and edit the form. Press NUM PAD PLUS, or click outside the form fields if you are using a mouse, to get out of forms mode.

Auto Forms Mode and Form Controls

When you use the ARROW keys or press TAB or SHIFT+TAB on a web page and land in an edit field or combo box, forms mode is automatically on. JAWS also plays a sound to confirm that you are in Forms Mode. This is known as Auto Forms Mode and is useful because you never have to remember to manually turn on Forms Mode using the ENTER key when you move to a form control such as an edit field. Additionally, if someone clicks into an edit box with a MOUSE Click, forms mode comes on automatically.

Sounds Indicating Forms Mode On or Off

You hear one sound when JAWS enters forms mode and a slightly different sound when JAWS exits forms mode. These sounds can be changed to different sounds if you prefer. Here's how:

1.  In Chrome, press INSERT+F2.
2.  Select Settings Center and press ENTER.
3.  Focus is in the Search edit box. Type in "select sound for" without the quotes. JAWS filters out all results that do not match the search in the tree view below.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Select Sound for Entering Forms Mode in the filtered results of the tree view in Settings Center.
5.  Press SPACEBAR. A dialog box of sound choices opens.
6.  Press UP or DOWN ARROW to move through the list of sounds. JAWS has over 180 sounds included that you can choose from. You can also use first letter navigation.
7.  Press SPACEBAR or ALT+P to hear a sample of the sound.
8.  Press TAB to move to the OK button when you find a sound you want to use, and press SPACEBAR to activate it. Focus returns to the Settings Center tree view.
9.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Select Sound for Leaving Forms Mode in the filtered results of the tree view in Settings Center.
10. Press SPACEBAR. A dialog box of sound choices opens.
11. Press SPACEBAR or ALT+P to hear a sample of the sound.
12. Press TAB to move to the OK button and activate it with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved. Settings Center closes.

Additionally, you can turn the sounds that indicate forms mode on or off by using the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box. Don't follow these instructions at the moment, since we'll be using the sounds for the exercises that follow. However, here is how to change it later if you need to:

1.  Press INSERT+V to open the Quick Settings dialog box. Focus is in the search edit box.
2.  Type in "use sound" without the quotes. JAWS filters out all results that do not match the search in the tree view below.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the item in the tree view "Use Sound - checked" in the Virtual Cursor Options.
4.  Press SPACEBAR to uncheck the check box.
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. Quick Settings closes and the changes are saved.

When you exit the form control, either using the arrow keys, the tab key, or by clicking somewhere else outside of the form controls with a mouse, forms mode is turned off and you hear the sound indicating this. Forms mode is also automatically turned off when the form is submitted or the page refreshes. Alternatively, press NUM PAD PLUS at any time to get out of forms mode.

When you use JAWS on the Internet, JAWS uses the virtual cursor, an invisible reading cursor, as the default cursor for reading information. As you navigate, there is a visible reading highlight that surrounds the word or line where you are reading, which makes it easier to tell where the virtual cursor is. To complete a form on a web page, you need to use the PC cursor, which is a visible blinking cursor.

NOTE: When using JAWS navigation quick keys, the default setting is for forms mode not to come on automatically. This can be changed in the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box accessed by pressing INSERT+V or in the JAWS Settings Center discussed earlier. Using navigation quick keys in forms is discussed in more detail later in this lesson.

Keyboard Navigation within Forms

Keyboard navigation within forms can be done in many different ways. Most people will use one or a combination of the following:

-   ARROW keys
-   TAB key
-   Navigation Quick Keys

Using the Arrow Keys to Explore a Form

EXERCISE: Open the Web Track Sample Form and follow along with the instructions below and use just the ARROW Keys to explore the form:

1.  First, make sure the cursor is at the top of the page. Press CTRL+HOME.
2.  Let's explore how using the arrow keys works when a form control is encountered. Begin pressing DOWN ARROW one line at a time. Stop when you reach the first field label, First *. Just after the label for First * is an edit box.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW one time and listen. Did you hear JAWS announce "edit" and play a sound? The sound indicates that forms mode has come on automatically. JAWS announced that the cursor is now in the edit box. You could begin typing now and put your name here, but for now do not do that.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW again. Did you hear a different sound? Forms mode is now off again since the virtual cursor moved out of the edit box and back into the main part of the web page.
5.  Continue to press DOWN ARROW to move through the fields for Middle and Last edit boxes. Notice that as you move into an edit box with an arrow key, forms mode comes on automatically and you hear the sound indicating this has happened. Also, as you move out of an edit field with an arrow key, forms mode goes off automatically, and again you hear the sound indicating this has happened.

Notice that as you use the arrow keys with JAWS, forms mode only comes on when you are in an edit box. Whenever an edit area is detected, JAWS allows you to begin typing immediately. Yet, at the same time, if focus is not in an edit area, reading mode stays on. This gives you the ability to quickly type information into edit boxes, and still gives you plenty of flexibility to move around the form.

TIP: Why is forms mode not turned on when buttons, check boxes, or other controls are encountered? The reason is because these controls can generally be activated without going into forms mode. For example, the SPACEBAR toggles the check mark on or off for check boxes. Pressing SPACEBAR also moves the selection of a radio button from one choice to another, and activates buttons such as the OK, Cancel, or Submit button. You don't have to switch to forms mode to do this.

Using the TAB Key to Explore a Form

EXERCISE: Open the Web Track Sample Form and follow along with the instructions below and use only the TAB key to move through the form:

1.  First, make sure the cursor is at the top of the page. Press CTRL+HOME.
2.  Press the navigation quick key F to move to the first field on the page, the First * edit box.
3.  Remember, forms mode does NOT come on automatically when using navigation quick keys. Press ENTER to go into forms mode.
4.  Go ahead and type your first name here if you have not already done so. Did you hear JAWS announce that this is a required field? Often, web page developers use the asterisk, *, to indicate required fields. The asterisk can be seen by sighted individuals and you can hear it with JAWS when reading through the form with the arrow keys. The text that JAWS spoke, First Name, this is a required field, is delivered by an ARIA attribute called aria-label. In this case the aria-label gives information that is not visible on the screen such as the word, "Name" and the phrase, "This is a required field." ARIA stands for Accessible Rich Internet Applications, and is a technical specification for increasing the accessibility of web pages.
5.  Press TAB to move to the next edit field, Middle. Did you hear JAWS announce, "Middle initial?" In this case the web page author used a different HTML attribute, the title attribute, to give you the extra information. The word "initial" is not visible on the screen. It is, however, shown as a visible tool tip to people who hover a mouse over the field.
6.  Press TAB again to move to the Last * field. Again, you should hear JAWS announce, "Last name. This is a required field," as a result of the aria-label attribute.

As you continue to press TAB or SHIFT+TAB notice that as long as you are in an edit box, forms mode is turned on automatically. When the cursor moves out of an edit box, forms mode goes off automatically, and you hear the sound indicating this has happened.

Forms that Automatically Advance to the Next Field

Web page authors may sometimes create form fields that move the PC cursor to the next form field automatically. This can make a long day of filling out forms a lot easier! These types of form controls that automatically move the cursor to the next field are typically seen in fields that have a fixed number of characters, such as phone number fields and social security number fields. As soon as the final character is input, the form moves the cursor immediately to the next field or control.

EXERCISE: Follow along and experience how some form fields can advance the cursor to the next field automatically when the first field is complete:

1.  First, make sure the cursor is at the top of the page. Press CTRL+HOME.
2.  Press TAB several times to move to the Area Code edit box. This is the first of three telephone number edit boxes.
3.  In this first one, type in three numbers. The focus automatically moves to the next field.
4.  In the second phone number field, the Exchange edit box, type in another three numbers. The focus automatically moves to the next field, the four digit phone number edit box.
5.  In the Number edit box, type in four numbers. Notice that the focus automatically moves to the next field, the email address field.

NOTE: The Web Track sample form used in Surf's Up does not collect or send any data. It is just a practice page.

You will occasionally come across similar types of auto-advance edit fields as you interact with forms on the web.

AutoComplete Settings in Internet Explorer

Most web browsers offer an AutoComplete feature to help you remember things you type. This can happen when typing in edit boxes for web page addresses, search inquiries, and more. For instance, this option is enabled by default in Chrome. If you are in an edit field where you have typed some information previously, as you type, a list forms near the edit field containing a match of any words beginning with the letters you type. You can then choose a word or phrase from the list and press TAB to move to the next form control without having to retype the whole word or phrase.

If you choose to keep the AutoComplete Settings on, if you press UP or DOWN ARROW you may find that the focus goes into a list of items that you have typed at some point in the past. This is designed to make it easier for you when filling out forms. It keeps you from having to retype a lot of information. To get out of such an edit box list of choices, perform the following two steps:

1.  First, press ESC to close the list.
2.  Then press NUM PAD PLUS to turn forms mode off again.

Now you can continue to use the arrow keys to explore and read through the form.

EXERCISE: Use the search edit box on the Freedom Scientific web site.

Go to the Freedom Scientific web site, https://www.FreedomScientific.com.

Start from the top of the page by pressing CTRL+HOME.

Press TAB until you find the Search edit box. You should hear a sound indicating that forms mode is on. If not, press ENTER to go into forms mode.

Begin typing some text, perhaps the word JAWS. Now, press DOWN ARROW to see if you find a list of items containing the word JAWS. On my computer I find the following, because I have done searches of our web site before:

-   JAWS
-   JAWS keystrokes
-   JAWS screen reader
-   and more

5.  Next, choose one of the items in the list. Just press TAB once you find it in the list. The list closes and the search edit box is populated with that item. Focus moves to the Go button.
6.  Press SHIFT+TAB to move back to the search edit box to verify that the item you chose in the list is there now.
7.  Let's delete this item from the list. When you pressed SHIFT+TAB to move back to the search edit box, the word or phrase that was there becomes highlighted, or selected. Just press the DEL key. The word or phrase is now gone.
8.  Press DOWN ARROW again to begin moving through the AutoComplete list.
9.  Now, let us say that you do not want to populate the search edit box and wish to leave it empty. Press ESC to close the list.
10. Next, press NUM PAD PLUS to get out of forms mode.
11. Now press DOWN ARROW. Focus should move to the Go button. Now you can continue reading the page with the arrow keys.
12. When you are finished practicing with the Freedom Scientific web page, press CTRL+F4 to close it.

Navigation Quick Keys in Forms with Auto Forms Mode off (Default Setting)

When using navigation quick keys in forms, forms mode does not turn on automatically. This is great because it gives you the ability to move quickly from one part of a form to another without having to worry about forms mode coming on.

For example, let's say you have an email program which is web-based. Often there will be a check box in front of each new item in the Inbox. You can quickly move to a check box by pressing the letter X and then read the subject line of that message. However, you may not want to go into forms mode because you want to move to a Reply button. If forms mode came on when you moved to the check box you would have to turn off forms mode before you could use the navigation quick key B to move to the Reply button.

EXERCISE: Open the Web Track Sample Form and follow along with the instructions below to experiment with navigation quick keys:

1.  First, make sure the cursor is at the top of the page. Press CTRL+HOME.
2.  Press the navigation quick key B several times to explore what buttons are available in this form. You should find a total of five different buttons. This is a nice way to find out if there is a Submit button or a Send button, for example.
3.  Press the navigation quick key A to explore the radio buttons in the form.
4.  Next, press the navigation quick key X to explore the check boxes in the form. The check boxes are located in two different areas on this form.
5.  Let's say you have explored the form and now want to move back to the edit box for the first name, which is located near the top of the form. Just press the navigation quick key E and focus wraps back to the top of the page where the first name edit box is located.

You can tell from this example how nice it is to be able to use navigation quick keys to explore a form without having forms mode come on. It is also great to be able to move directly and efficiently to certain controls within a form.

NOTE: The default setting for JAWS is to NOT go into forms mode when using navigation quick keys. However, this can be changed. Read the next section to find out how.

Navigation Quick Keys in Forms with Auto Forms Mode On

If you use forms a lot, you may want to have forms mode come on when using navigation quick keys. You can change JAWS to have forms mode come on if you are using navigation quick keys, and pause for a given number of seconds on a control.

EXERCISE: Open the Web Track Sample Form and follow along with the instructions below to experiment with navigation quick keys set to turn on forms mode after pausing for several seconds on a control:

1.  First, make sure the cursor is at the top of the page. Press CTRL+HOME.
2.  Open the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box by pressing INSERT+V. Focus is in the search edit box.
3.  Type in "delay" without the quotes. JAWS filters out all results that do not match the search in the tree view below.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the item "Navigation Quick Key Delay - Never" in the Virtual Cursor Options.
5.  Press SPACEBAR to change this to three seconds.
6.  Next, press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. JAWS Quick Settings closes and the changes are saved.

Now when using auto forms mode, and navigating with navigation quick keys, JAWS will toggle Forms Mode on after three seconds if you remain on that control. This only happens when the control is an edit box, list, or a combo box. Do you remember why forms mode does not come on for check boxes or buttons? It is because their state can be changed or activated by using the SPACEBAR.

7.  Now, press the navigation quick key E to move through the edit boxes of the form. Make sure to press it within less than three seconds to confirm that you can still navigate without going into forms mode. If you need to change the delay to a little longer, you can adjust the time in the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box up to a maximum of five seconds.
8.  Next, press the navigation quick key E again until you find the first name edit box. This time, wait for three seconds. Did you hear the sound indicating that forms mode is now on after the delay?
9.  Press NUM PAD PLUS to get out of forms mode for now. You hear the sound indicating that forms mode is now off.

You can see how this could be handy for people who fill out forms a lot! For now, go ahead and change the settings back to Navigation Quick Key Delay - Never using the instructions given in steps one through six above.

TIP: If you go to a particular domain, such as an Intranet or a group of web pages such as Microsoft.com or FreedomScientific.com where you want this to happen all the time you can use Personalized Settings for JAWS to turn forms mode on when using navigation quick keys every time you visit that site. Personalized Settings can be found in the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box below the section for Virtual Cursor Options.

Check Boxes and Radio Buttons

To quickly select a check box or radio button on a form, press NUM PAD SLASH when the virtual cursor is on the item. If the selected control is a check box, the state of the check box is toggled. If the control is a radio button that is not selected, this command selects the radio button. JAWS does not switch to forms mode, so you can easily continue reading the page. You can also use SPACEBAR to toggle the state of a check box or select a radio button without going into forms mode.

EXERCISE: Open the Web Track Sample Form and follow along with the instructions below to experiment with check boxes and radio buttons:

1.  First, make sure the cursor is at the top of the page. Press CTRL+HOME.
2.  Press the navigation quick key A to move to the first group of radio buttons. You hear, "Product(s) in Warranty, Yes radio button checked, one of two."

NOTE: You may not hear the label spoken properly in Chrome at the present time. Whenever you hear something that is not expected, don't hesitate to try the same page in a different browser, such as Firefox. In Firefox the label is currently spoken properly.

3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the second radio button. You hear, "radio button not checked."
4.  Press either the keyboard command for the left mouse button, NUM PAD SLASH, or the SPACEBAR to move the check mark from the first radio button to the second one. If you are using a mouse, just click the second radio button.
5.  Press UP ARROW to move back to the first radio button and verify it is not checked.
6.  Press DOWN ARROW to move back to the second radio button and verify it is checked.

Notice that throughout the above process, forms mode was never turned on. You used the navigation quick key A for radio buttons to move the virtual cursor to a radio button, and changed the check mark without getting into forms mode.

Combo Boxes

When reading with the arrow keys, if the virtual cursor moves to a combo box forms mode is not automatically turned on. (NOTE: Forms mode may come on even when navigating with the virtual cursor if AutoComplete settings are used in that control.) To change the selection, press ALT+DOWN ARROW to open the list of choices. Forms mode comes on. Then, use the ARROW Keys to select an item. Press ALT+UP ARROW to close the list of choices. The item is now selected in the combo box and forms mode goes off again. Then press TAB to move to the next control. (Or use the ARROW KEYS to continue reading.)

EXERCISE: Open the Web Track Sample Form and follow along with the instructions below to experiment with combo boxes:

1.  First, make sure the cursor is at the top of the page. Press CTRL+HOME.
2.  Press C to move to the combo box for Action Taken.
3.  Press UP ARROW to move to the form label, which is to the left of the combo box visually, but on the line above the combo box in the virtual world. You should hear JAWS say "action taken."
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move back to the combo box.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW again to move below the combo box.

Notice that all this time, forms mode has not come on. You are still reading with the virtual cursor.

6.  Press UP ARROW to move back up to the combo box.
7.  Press ENTER to go into forms mode. Did you hear the sound indicating that JAWS is now in forms mode? At this point press the ARROW Keys and explore the choices available in the list of items within the combo box.

NOTE: Going into a combo box using this method causes only the selected item in the list to be visible within the combo box. Visually, the rest of the list of choices cannot be seen.

8.  Press NUM PAD PLUS to get out of forms mode.
9.  Now, try doing it a different way. Still with the virtual cursor on the combo box, press ALT+DOWN ARROW. Did you hear forms mode come on again? Now the list of items in the combo box has been opened so that all items are shown visually. Use the ARROW Keys again to move up and down the list to select a choice.
10. When you have made a selection you want to keep, press ALT+UP ARROW. This action does two things. First, it closes the list with the item you had chosen in the list now visible as the selected choice in the combo box. It also turns forms mode off. Again, you hear the sound indicating that forms mode is off.

Spend a few minutes on this combo box practicing the two methods discussed to get into and out of forms mode, and make a selection from the list of available items. When you are finished, make sure that forms mode is off by pressing NUM PAD PLUS.

Semi-Auto Forms Mode

Some options for forms mode can be changed. For example, you might prefer to use the classic forms mode (forms mode off) instead of auto forms mode. Or you may want to use Semi-Auto forms mode. Let us take a look at the Semi-Auto forms mode using JAWS Quick Settings.

You can make some adjustments to forms mode by using the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box. JAWS automatically saves the changes you make until you change them again.

EXERCISE: Open the Web Track Sample Form and follow along with the instructions below and explore some of the items you can change in the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box:

1.  First, make sure the cursor is at the top of the page. Press CTRL+HOME.
2.  Press INSERT+V to open the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box. Focus is in the search edit box.
3.  Type in "auto" without the quotes. JAWS filters out all results that do not match the search in the tree view below.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the choice that reads "Auto Forms Mode - Auto" in the Virtual Cursor Options. There are three options here, Auto, Semi-auto, and Manual.
5.  Press SPACEBAR to change this to Semi-auto.
6.  Next, press TAB to move to the OK button, and then press SPACEBAR to activate it. Quick Settings closes and the changes are saved. Focus returns to the Web Track sample page.
7.  Press DOWN ARROW to move through the controls on the page. The virtual cursor finds the label, First *.
8.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the edit box. Notice that forms mode has not come on automatically.
9.  Continue to press DOWN ARROW to move through the controls on the page. The virtual cursor reads the label first and then the edit box second for each control. Notice that you do not hear the different sounds indicating forms mode is on, then off, and then on again constantly as you arrow through the form. This is great for people who have to use forms all day long and who have been listening to the different sounds as JAWS goes into and out of forms mode. Much less of a distraction!
10. Now, press TAB and SHIFT+TAB to navigate through the controls on this page. Notice that when you encounter edit fields or combo boxes, Forms Mode automatically turns on and off.
11. When you do come across an edit box using the ARROW keys that you need to enter text in, just press ENTER to go into forms mode.
12. Press NUM PAD PLUS to get out of forms mode when you are finished or press TAB to move to the next form control.

We think once you get accustomed to using semi-auto forms mode you will like it very much. Go ahead and follow the instructions above if you wish to switch auto forms mode back on again. When you find the selection that says "Auto Forms Mode - Semi-Auto" just press SPACEBAR to change it back to "Auto" again. Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR.

Form Control Prompts

HTML allows the author of a web page to specifically associate text prompts (or labels) with form controls. JAWS recognizes when a prompt is specifically associated with a control, and speaks the correct prompt when you move to that control. If no prompt is specifically associated with a control, JAWS attempts to identify text positioned near the control as the prompt. This is most accurate when the text is directly to the left or above the form control.

PDF Form

EXERCISE: Open the attached PDF sample form and try it using the techniques you have learned. JAWS handles PDF forms the same way as HTML forms.

List of Virtual HTML Features

Take a minute to look at and use the JAWS List of Virtual HTML Features, INSERT+F3. This is a handy way to generate lists of many items found in the virtual environment.

Back          Next

﻿— lang: en title: Freedom Scientific Company Info —

﻿— lang: en title: History —

Freedom Scientific

[Photo montage of people with visual and sensory impairments listening with headphones, using a computer and walking with a friend.]

Freedom Scientific is the world’s leader in technology-based solutions for people with visual impairments. Our low vision products are designed to improve the lives of those whose eyesight is diminished to any degree and for any reason, including: diabetes, macular degeneration, glaucoma, cataracts, and retinitis pigmentosa. Freedom Scientific has also developed leading-edge products that enable the blind to have complete access to information and computing. In addition, Freedom Scientific is a leading developer of products specifically designed to assist persons with reading-related learning challenges. Freedom Scientific’s products help people stay active, remain independent, and live better.

Freedom Scientific is a privately-held company. It has offices in Florida, California, and the Netherlands as well as distributors in more than 56 countries. Approximately one in four of Freedom Scientific’s employees has a visual impairment. These employees work in virtually every facet of the Company’s operations — technical support, product testing, development, sales (both inside and outside), customer service, quality assurance, and product management.

 

  ﻿— lang: en title: Contact Information —

Locations

North American Corporate Offices

17757 US Highway 19 North
Suite 560
Clearwater, FL 33764
Phone: 800-444-4443 or 727-803-8000
Fax: 727-803-8001

Technical Support

All Products call 727-803-8600 Monday - Friday, 8:30 AM - 7 PM, Eastern Time

European Headquarters

Breslau 4, 2993 LT
Barendrecht
The Netherlands
Phone: +31 88 67 83 444
Fax: +31 88 67 83 400
﻿— lang: en title: About Freedom Scientific —

About Freedom Scientific

Empowering Independence with Technology

Freedom Scientific is the largest worldwide manufacturer of assistive technology products for those with vision impairments or learning disabilities. Freedom Scientific is the only company with a complete line of products for those with vision impairments. All our products are tested and guaranteed to work together. For over 20 years, we have helped people in over 70 countries using 24 languages achieve their professional and personal goals. ﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, frames’ lang: en title: Reading Pages with Frames —

[Surf's Up]

Reading Pages with Frames

Some web pages use frames to display content. A frame is an area of the page that browsers treats like a separate window. Each frame is capable of displaying an independent Web page. The Freedom Scientific Company Info page is a sample web page that uses frames to display different types of information. One frame contains addresses for Freedom Scientific locations, another contains a brief history of the company, and the last frame contains some general information about Freedom Scientific.

In the following exercises, you will use a sample web page to learn how to navigate frames:

1.  Go to the Freedom Scientific Company Info sample Web page. Notice that JAWS says there are three frames.
2.  When you first open the sample Web page, you are in the Company Locations frame. Press INSERT+F9 to display a list of all the frames on this page.
3.  Select "Corporate History" and press ENTER. JAWS moves you to the Corporate History frame.
4.  Use the JAWS reading commands to read all the text in this frame. Notice that as you navigate, JAWS does not indicate when you leave the current frame and move into the next frame. This is the default behavior and is explained below.
5.  Press M to move to the next frame on the page. Notice that JAWS reads the first line of text in the frame which in this case is a level 1 heading.
6.  Press SHIFT+M to move back to the previous frame.

By default, JAWS does not announce when you enter or leave a fframe. This is because many frames on websites are not labeled properly and most of the time, a frame's title does not accurately reflect its content. One example is a Google Maps frame that is used on some websites to show the location of the particular company. Many times, the lable for these frames is just a series of letters and numbers, which provides no useful information when announced by JAWS.

If you would like JAWS to indicate when you enter or leave a frame, do the following:

1.  Press INSERT+F2, and select Settings Center.
2.  In the Search edit box, type "web verbosity" without the quotes.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to "Configure Web Verbosity Levels" in the filtered search results in the tree view and press ENTER.
4.  Press RIGHT ARROW to expand the "Configure Web Verbosity Levels" group.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Medium and press SPACEBAR. A dialog box opens containing a tree view listing the structural elements that can be announced by the Virtual Cursor.
6.  Press F until you reach Frames and press the SPACEBAR to toggle the announcement of this element.
7.  Select OK to exit this dialog box and select OK once more to close Settings Center.

Now, to see how this works:

1.  Go to the Freedom Scientific Company Info sample Web page. JAWS now says "Contact Information Frame" which is the first frame on the page.
2.  Begin using the arrow keys to read the text. As you move through the page, JAWS announces the name of the previous frame and says, "Frame end." JAWS then announces the name of the next frame.
3.  Press M and SHIFT+M to move between frames. JAWS now speaks the actual name of the frame instead of reading the heading as it did in the previous exercise when frame announcement was disabled.

Inline Frames

Inline Frames are embedded directly within a Web page and display the contents of another page. Visually, these types of frames usually look like images or banners. Inline frames are often used by Websites to display advertisements. To ignore inline frames use Quick Settings as follows:

1.  Press INSERT+V. Quick Settings opens with focus in the search edit box.
2.  Type in inline. The tree view below the edit box changes to filter out results that do not match.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the item Inline Frames Show. The default is On.
4.  Press SPACEBAR to toggle this setting to Off.
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. Quick settings closes and the changes are saved.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, language detection, automatic language switching’ lang: en title: Languages with JAWS on the Internet —

[Surf's Up]

Languages with JAWS on the Internet

JAWS provides language switching with any supported speech synthesizer. When a Web page author indicates the language of an entire page, or just part of a page, if the synthesizer in use supports that language, JAWS uses the language specific version of the synthesizer to speak the text. The synthesizer must support the language of the information.

If the synthesizer does not support the language specified for a page or part of a page, JAWS still indicates the language of the information.

To demonstrate automatic language detection, we start in English and write:
"My computer speaks English."

Then we write the same sentence in French,
mon ordinateur parle français
and then in Spanish,
mi computadora habla español
and in Portuguese,
meu computador fala o português
and the same in German,
mein computer spricht deutsch
and in Russian,
Мой компьютер говорит по-русски
and in Finnish,
Tietokoneeni puhuu suomea
and in Italian,
il mio computer parla italiano
and in Greek,
Ο υπολογιστής μου μηλάει ελληνικά,
and in Polish,
Mój komputer mówi po polsku
and in Chinese,
我的電腦說中文

JAWS switches between the languages very smoothly, when it can. If JAWS only said, "Russian," "Greek," or "Polish," instead of reading the text in those languages, this indicates that your speech synthesizer (Eloquence, for example) does not support those languages. If you are using Vocalizer Expressive, it indicates that you do not have those particular voices installed.

JAWS includes a utility that makes it easy to seamlessly sample and install or remove Vocalizer Expressive 2 premium voices. To install Vocalizer Expressive voices, do the following:

1.  Press INSERT+J to open the JAWS application window.
2.  Press ALT+O to open the Options menu, expand the Voices submenu, and then select Add/Remove Voices to open the Add/Remove Vocalizer Expressive Voices utility.
3.  In the Select a Language combo box, select the language that you want to download voices for.
4.  In the Premium Voices list box, press the SPACEBAR on the voices you want to install. You can select as many voices as you like. To hear a sample of the current voice before deciding if you want to select it, press ALT+P.
5.  Select the Install Selected Voices button to begin the installation.

Alternatively, you can visit the Synthesizers download page to locate more free voices and languages for your use.

Back          Next

﻿— lang: en title: ‘E-Stocks Sample Page’ —

E-Stocks Fictitious Online Stock Brokerage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This page uses Javascript. Your browser either doesn't support Javascript or you have it turned off. To see this page as it is meant to appear please use a Javascript enabled browser.

+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Top Stories {#101}                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Portfolio Summary {#104}                                                                    | Tip of the Day {#105}                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                       |
| U.S. stocks rise as hopes for bounce rise {#102}                                                                                                                                                                              | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ | Look for Activision's stock (ATVI) to continue to rise pending the anticipated release of the sequel to last year's Game of the Year. |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | Symbol               | ::: {align=“center”} Price ::: | ::: {align=“center”} Change ::: | |                                                                                                                                       |
| Major U.S. stock indices rose to new levels as hopes for a bounce following the prior session's poor results seem justified.                                                                                                  | +======================+================================+=================================+ | For more on this company, refer to the listing ATVI in the Research section.                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | ATVI                 | 18.88                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
| Market Overview {#103}                                                                                                                                                                                                        | |                      |                                |                                 | | Market Summary {#106}                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
| Range-bound trading persists, with the major averages not making much headway. The airline sector, which has been in a downtrend since the end of January, has garnered some interest today, with the XAL index gaining 1.5%. | |                      |                                |                                 | | Dow 25,895.81 +117.91 (+0.46%)                                                                                                        |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | | Nasdaq 7,827.13 +1.13 (+0.01%)                                                                                                        |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | | S&P 500 2,876.92 +7.88 (+0.28%)                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | | 10-Yr Bond 0.28% +0.0030                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | | NYSE Volume 3,919,545,000                                                                                                             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | | Nasdaq Volume 520,565,399                                                                                                             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | CTGO                 | 36.59                          | -                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (-                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | LEA                  | 65.43                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | NSM                  | 38.62                          | -                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (-                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | NT                   | 7.89                           | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | SEIC                 | 34.25                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | SFG                  | 65.20                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | WHR                  | 76.03                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | YHOO                 | 46.96                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to Section: Research Manage Portfolio My Account News Opinion

﻿— lang: en title: ‘E-Stocks Sample Page’ —

E-Stocks Fictitious Online Stock Brokerage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This page uses Javascript. Your browser either doesn't support Javascript or you have it turned off. To see this page as it is meant to appear please use a Javascript enabled browser.

+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Top Stories {#101}                                                                                                                                                                                                            | Portfolio Summary {#104}                                                                    | Tip of the Day {#105}                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                       |
| U.S. stocks rise as hopes for bounce rise {#102}                                                                                                                                                                              | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ | Look for Activision's stock (ATVI) to continue to rise pending the anticipated release of the sequel to last year's Game of the Year. |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | Symbol               | ::: {align=“center”} Price ::: | ::: {align=“center”} Change ::: | |                                                                                                                                       |
| Major U.S. stock indices rose to new levels as hopes for a bounce following the prior session's poor results seem justified.                                                                                                  | +======================+================================+=================================+ | For more on this company, refer to the listing ATVI in the Research section.                                                          |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | ATVI                 | 18.88                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
| Market Overview {#103}                                                                                                                                                                                                        | |                      |                                |                                 | | Market Summary {#106}                                                                                                                 |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
| Range-bound trading persists, with the major averages not making much headway. The airline sector, which has been in a downtrend since the end of January, has garnered some interest today, with the XAL index gaining 1.5%. | |                      |                                |                                 | | Dow 25,895.81 +117.91 (+0.46%)                                                                                                        |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | | Nasdaq 7,827.13 +1.13 (+0.01%)                                                                                                        |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | | S&P 500 2,876.92 +7.88 (+0.28%)                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | | 10-Yr Bond 0.28% +0.0030                                                                                                              |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | | NYSE Volume 3,919,545,000                                                                                                             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | | Nasdaq Volume 520,565,399                                                                                                             |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | CTGO                 | 36.59                          | -                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (-                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | LEA                  | 65.43                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | NSM                  | 38.62                          | -                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (-                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | NT                   | 7.89                           | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | SEIC                 | 34.25                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | SFG                  | 65.20                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | WHR                  | 76.03                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | | YHOO                 | 46.96                          | +                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | (                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | .                               | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                |                                 | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | |                      |                                | %)                              | |                                                                                                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | +----------------------+--------------------------------+---------------------------------+ |                                                                                                                                       |
+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jump to Section: Research Manage Portfolio My Account News Opinion

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, links, tagged images, page refresh, notifications’ lang: en title: Dealing with Difficult Pages —

[Surf's Up]

Dealing with Difficult Pages

JAWS makes reading and using the Internet easy and fun. However, Web page authors must follow certain guidelines to make their pages accessible to JAWS and other screen reading software. JAWS reads most pages well, even if they are not designed with accessibility in mind. Occasionally, you may come across a page that is poorly designed or difficult to use with JAWS. In this section, you will learn some tricks for dealing with these difficult Web pages.

Reading Pages that Refresh Automatically

Some Web pages automatically refresh - or reload - after a certain period of time. Usually this is done to update information on the page in a timely fashion. When a page refreshes, JAWS moves you back to the beginning of the page. This can interrupt what you are doing. To see an example of a page like this, go to the refreshing version of the E-Stocks sample page and try to read through it. This version of the E-Stocks sample page is designed to refresh every twenty seconds so you can practice this lesson.

JAWS Tip: Notice that JAWS informs you how often this page reloads. You must be using Beginner verbosity to hear this message.

EXERCISE: Follow along with the steps below to make pages that automatically refresh easier to work with:

1.  Go to the refreshing version of the E-Stocks sample page.
2.  Press INSERT+V. Quick Settings opens with focus in the search edit box.
3.  Type page refresh in the search edit box. The tree view below the search edit box filters out all items that do not match the search phrase.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Page Refresh for the virtual cursor options.
5.  Press the SPACEBAR to choose "Off."
6.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. Quick Settings closes and the changes are saved.
7.  Try reading through the refreshing version of the E-Stocks sample page again. The page still refreshes every 20 seconds, but you can read the text without being interrupted or returning to the top of the page.

Working with Improperly Tagged Images

Sometimes a Web page author does not assign alternate text, a title, or a long description to images on the page. JAWS ignores images like these because the program cannot provide you with any useful information. However, if the image is also a link, then JAWS announces the location (or file path) of the image. You can also view the destination URL of the image link.

JAWS Tip: You can also have JAWS announce images on the page with no descriptive text that aren't links. Alternatively, you can tell JAWS to ignore all images on the page. To do this, press INSERT+V to open Quick Settings. Look for "Graphics Show - Tagged" and choose "All" to hear all images on the page, or choose "None" if you don't want JAWS to announce any images.

The image below this paragraph is the Freedom Scientific corporate logo. It is also a link to the Freedom Scientific Web site. This image does not have any descriptive text. When you move to the image, JAWS reads the name of the file. Unfortunately, in this case the file name is also not descriptive.

[]

EXERCISE: Follow the steps below to obtain some more information about this image:

1.  Press INSERT+V. The Quick Settings dialog box appears. Focus is in the search edit box.
2.  Type in untagged. Quick Settings filters out everything else that does not match the search term.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to "Untagged Graphical Links Show - Image Source" in the virtual cursor options.
4.  Press the SPACEBAR to choose "Untagged Graphical Links Show - URL."
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. Quick Settings closes and the changes are saved.
6.  Press G to make sure focus is back on the Freedom Scientific logo image link. Notice that JAWS now reads the destination of this graphic link, which is www.FreedomScientific.com.

NOTE: Be sure to follow the steps above and change this setting back to "Untagged Graphical Links Show - Image Source" when you are finished testing this.

Getting More Information about Links

Sometimes the text of a link will not be very descriptive. For example, a Web page may have a link called "Click here." To change how JAWS reads links on a Web page, do the following:

Press INSERT+V. Quick Settings opens with focus in the search edit box.

Type text links in the search edit box. Quick Settings filters out everything in the tree view below the search edit box except for items that match the search phrase.

Press DOWN ARROW to find "Text Links Show Using - Screen Text" in the virtual cursor options.

Press the SPACEBAR to cycle through the available options. You find the following choices:

-   Alt Attribute - JAWS looks for and reads information provided by the Alt attribute if assigned.
-   Longest - JAWS speaks the longest string of information for each link.
-   Custom Search - JAWS searches for information in the order specified in the "order list" in Settings Center and reads the first information found.
-   Title - JAWS first looks for and reads information provided by the <title> attribute. If no title text is found, JAWS reads the on screen text.
-   Screen Text - JAWS reads the on screen text. This is the default setting.

For now, press ESC to get out of the Quick Settings dialog box.

The following is an example of a link with both screen text and a title attribute:

Training and Certification

EXERCISE: Follow the instructions below to switch between the screen text and the title and notice how JAWS reads each:

1.  Press INSERT+V to open the Quick Settings dialog box.
2.  Type text links in the search edit box. Quick Settings filters out everything in the tree view below the search edit box except for items that match the search phrase.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to find "Text Links Show Using - Screen Text" in the virtual cursor options.
4.  Press the SPACEBAR to cycle through the available options until you find Text Links Show Using - Title.
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. Quick Settings closes and the changes are saved.
6.  Now re-read the link.
7.  Open the JAWS list of links with INSERT+F7 and notice the title now appears there as well.
8.  Press ESC to get out of the list of links when you are finished.

NOTE: Be sure to follow the steps above when you are finished and change JAWS back to Text Links Show Using - Screen Text in the virtual cursor options again.

EXERCISE: The next two links both have the same screen text, but contain a different title. Which of the two links pertains to learning more about Fusion? Follow the instructions above to change JAWS from Text Links Show Using - Screen Text in the virtual cursor options to Text Links Show Using - Title. Open the JAWS list of links now using INSERT+F7 and find these two links. How do the links read in the list of links? When you are finished be sure to change JAWS back to the default setting, Text Links Show Using - Screen Text. Look again at the links with the JAWS list of links.

Learn More

Learn More

Skipping Past Site Navigation

Many sites have site navigation elements, such as navigation bars or a long series of links, at the top of each page. These links are a useful way to help visitors get around the site. However, designs like this can make it difficult for users of screen readers to get to the content of each page on the site, since you have to read through all the links first.

TIP: Some sites may provide a link at the top of each page called "Skip to Main Content," "Skip Navigation," or something similar. You can use these links to move past the site navigation and get to the page content.

To skip past site navigation links, buttons, and other elements, use the navigation quick key N. Pressing N moves you to the next block of text that is not a link. Usually, pressing N a few times will take you right to the main content of the page.

Accessing Browser Notifications

From time to time, your browser may display a notification or alert depending on what you are doing. These alerts may include but are not limited to blocked popup windows, running active content, saving website logon information, or downloading files.

JAWS will announce when a notification appears followd by the text of the alert. If focus does not automatically move to it and remains on the web page, press F6 or SHIFT+F6 to move to the notification. There will most likely be one or more buttons that you can move to by pressing TAB or SHIFT+TAB. The notification closes once you choose one of the available buttons to perform an action.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, JAWS find’ lang: en title: The JAWS Find Command —

[Surf's Up]

Using the JAWS Find Command

You can use the JAWS Find command to find specific words or phrases on a Web page. This works on long Web pages even if that information is not currently in view on the screen. The Find command searches from the location of the cursor to the bottom of the document by default, so it is best to start at the top of the page by pressing CTRL+HOME.

Open the sample page Jim's Cafe at Innisport and press CTRL+HOME to go to the top of the page.

Press CTRL+F to open the JAWS Find dialog box. Focus is in an edit box where you can type a search keyword or phrase. You can press the TAB key to move from one control to another within the dialog box. The different controls include:

-   Find what edit box. Press the DOWN or UP arrow keys to move to previously searched for items. You can also open a list of the items in the combo box by pressing ALT+DOWN ARROW and then use first letter navigation to move to an item more quickly. It contains a history of the last 20 entries searched for.
-   Context Specific History check box. This check box controls whether or not the Find history is context specific for the current site. The check box is selected by default.
-   Maintain history of recent finds. This check box controls whether or not the Find What combo box maintains a history of items searched for. The default is checked.
-   Direction radio buttons, the default is to search forward
-   Ignore case checkbox, the default is checked, and
-   Find, Delete, Clear Find History, and Cancel buttons. The default is the Find button.

NOTE: The JAWS find is the default find in Internet browsers where the virtual cursor is supported. If you want to use the application's native find dialog box, first press INSERT+3 on the numbers row (JAWS pass through keystroke), followed by the keystroke CTRL+F.

3.  Let's say you heard that Jim's Cafe offers a really great club sandwich. Do the following to search to see if that is listed on this page. Type the words "club sandwich" and press ENTER. If you started at the top of the page, the words "club sandwich" are not visible on the screen. They are further down on the page. JAWS moves to the phrase and reads the line where the search phrase is found.
4.  Use the JAWS Say Word command (INSERT+NUMPAD 5). You should hear the word "club" spoken.
5.  Use the JAWS Next Word command (INSERT+RIGHT ARROW). You should hear JAWS say, "sandwich." JAWS moved you to the phrase right at the beginning of the word "club."
6.  Press CTRL+HOME to move back to the top of the page.
7.  Open the JAWS Find dialog box again by pressing CTRL+F and search for the word "town." You hear that the words around the word you searched for are "sleepy town of Innisport."
8.  Press the keystroke to repeat the Find command (F3). You hear that the words around your search word now are "in downtown Innisport." Notice that your search word is actually part of a larger word in this instance.
9.  Press F3 again and listen to the text you find.
10. Continue pressing F3 until you get a message that says, "wrapping to top," which indicates JAWS reached the last instance of the word "town" on this particular Web page and continued the search back at the top of the page again. JAWS also wraps when searching backward from the top of the page using SHIFT+F3.

When searching for words or phrases with JAWS, the important keystrokes to remember are:

-   CTRL+F to open the JAWS Find dialog box.
-   F3 to repeat the search in the forward direction.
-   SHIFT+F3 to repeat the search in the backward direction.

NOTE: The JAWS find dialog box is different from the regular find dialog box in other programs. When you are in programs that have their own find dialog box you can still choose the JAWS find command as an alternative if you wish to. In those instances, use the JAWS keystroke INSERT+CTRL+F.

Continue to experiment with this handy feature of JAWS. You will find this a very useful way of searching Web pages for specific information.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, skim reading’ lang: en title: Skim Reading —

[Surf's Up]

Skim Reading

Skim reading is a powerful reading, searching, and navigation tool available in JAWS. This feature allows you to quickly review long documents by reading the first line or sentence of each paragraph. Alternatively, you can search for passages containing specific words or phrases. In this section, you will learn how to skim read a Web page with JAWS. You will also learn how to create text rules and use them to skim Web pages for specific information.

NOTE: Before beginning the first exercise in this section, you should ensure that your skim reading preferences use the default settings. If you have previously changed these settings, press CTRL+SHIFT+INSERT+DOWN ARROW and verify that the Read First Line of Every Paragraph radio button is selected before continuing.

Skimming a Document

You can skim read a lengthy Web page to get an overview of the content and search for paragraphs or sections containing specific information.

EXERCISE: Follow along with the instructions below to practice skim reading text on the Internet with JAWS.

1.  Open the sample page Freedom Scientific Software Solutions, and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press CTRL+INSERT+DOWN ARROW to begin skim reading. JAWS reads the first line of each paragraph on the page.
3.  You can change your skim reading preferences so that JAWS reads the first sentence of each paragraph instead of the first line. Before doing this, press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
4.  To change your skim reading preferences, press INSERT+F2, select "Skim Reading Tool," and press ENTER.

Tip: Alternatively, you can use the shortcut CTRL+SHIFT+INSERT+DOWN ARROW to display the Skim Reading dialog box.

5.  In the Use Rule Type area, use the arrow keys to select the Read First Sentence of Every Paragraph radio button.
6.  Press ALT+S to activate the Start Skim Reading button to begin skim reading. Notice that JAWS now reads the first sentence of each paragraph.

Viewing the Skim Reading Summary

JAWS can display a summary of the current page in the Results Viewer. This summary contains all the text you would hear if you began skim reading from your present location using your currently selected options. Each segment of text is a link. You can move to a segment and press ENTER to jump to its location within the document. Once you create a summary, it remains available until you generate another, even if you switch to a different document or program.

EXERCISE: Practice creating and using a skim reading summary. Follow the steps below:

1.  Open the sample page Freedom Scientific Software Solutions and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press INSERT+F2, select "Skim Reading Tool," and press ENTER.
3.  The Create Summary button is the default button when you are in the Skim Reading dialog box, so just press ENTER to create a summary.
4.  JAWS displays a summary of the page in the Results Viewer. Use the arrow keys to explore the text in the Results Viewer. Notice that JAWS inserts a number before each sentence or line in the summary.
5.  Move to line number five, which should read "Product: Fusion," and press ENTER. JAWS moves you directly to that line on the page.
6.  Press ALT+TAB to move back to the Results Viewer summary again.
7.  Move to line number seven, which should read "Product: ZoomText Screen Magnification," and press ENTER. Again, JAWS moves you directly to that line on the page.
8.  For now, press ALT+TAB to move back to the Results Viewer window, and then close it by pressing ALT+F4.

Creating and Using Text Rules

So far, you have used the skim reading feature to read the first line or sentence of each paragraph. However, you can create text rules to search for specific words or phrases on the page. JAWS then searches the document for any lines, sentences, or paragraphs (depending on your preferences) containing the text. Text rules are saved and can be reused in any document and in any application.

EXERCISE: Follow the steps below to create a text rule that you will use later to skim read the Freedom Scientific Software Solutions page.

1.  Open the sample page Freedom Scientific Software Solutions, and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press INSERT+F2, select "Skim Reading Tool," and press ENTER.
3.  In the Use Rule Type area, use the arrow keys to select the Text Rules Apply for Reading radio button.
4.  Press TAB to move to the next control. Focus lands in the Rules History combo box. If you have never created rules before, the only item here is the item <New>. If you had created rules previously, there would be more than one item in this combo box. For now, press TAB to move to the next control.
5.  In the Text Search Pattern edit box, enter the word you want to search for. Type "product" for this exercise.
6.  Press ENTER to activate the default button, the Create Summary button.
7.  JAWS finds each line containing the term "product" and displays it in the Results Viewer. Notice how this allows you to find out quickly which products are listed on this page.
8.  Use the arrow keys to move to line number one, which reads, "Product: JAWS for Windows," and press ENTER. JAWS moves you to the beginning of the section of the page that discusses JAWS.
9.  Press ALT+TAB to move back to the Results Viewer, and then press ESC to close it for now.

Modifying Text Rules

EXERCISE: In this exercise, you will create a second text rule.

1.  Press INSERT+F2, select "Skim Reading Tool," and press ENTER.
2.  If you are continuing from the previous exercise, focus lands in the Rules History combo box. Be sure that the text rule you created ("product") is selected in the Rules History combo box. Press TAB to move to the Text Search Pattern edit box.
3.  In the Text Search Pattern edit box, type over the existing text and enter the word "JAWS" in its place.
4.  Press ENTER to activate the Create Summary button. The Skim Reading Summary appears with lines of text that contain the word JAWS. You should find four matches.
5.  When you finish exploring the Skim Read Summary, press ESC to close the results viewer.

Changing the Speak Unit

In the previous exercises JAWS read each line containing the search term.

EXERCISE: Change your skim reading preferences so that JAWS reads the first sentence or the entire paragraph instead.

1.  Open the sample page Freedom Scientific Software Solutions and press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
2.  Press INSERT+F2, select "Skim Reading Tool," and press ENTER.
3.  In the Use Rule Type area, verify that the Text Rules Apply for Reading radio button is selected. Also, verify that the text rule you created ("JAWS") is selected in the Rules History combo box.
4.  Press TAB to move to the Speak Unit combo box, and select "Sentences containing text rule."
5.  Press ENTER to create a Skim Reading Summary. Notice that the Skim Reading Summary now contains full sentences containing the word "JAWS."
6.  When you are finished reading the results, press ESC to close the Results Viewer.

Deleting a Rule

Once you have finished using a rule, you can delete it.

EXERCISE: Follow the steps below to delete the practice rule you created.

1.  Press INSERT+F2, select "Skim Reading Tool," and press ENTER.
2.  In the Rules History combo box, select the text rule that you created to search for the word JAWS.
3.  Press TAB to move to the Delete Rule button, and press the SPACEBAR.
4.  Move to the Close button, and press the SPACEBAR.

In addition to the Delete Rule button there is also a button to Delete All Rules.

Creating New Rules

Rules you create are saved automatically by JAWS. The name of the rule is normally the same text you use in the search. When creating rules, make sure you investigate the following items, unless you plan to overwrite an existing rule:

-   Any time you want to create a new rule, make sure you first select New in the Rules History combo box. Otherwise, you may edit an existing rule.
-   When creating a color rule, make sure that none of the attribute checkboxes were left checked from a previous rule.
-   Make sure you check the settings in the Speak Unit combo box for each rule to be certain the outcome is what you want. Press ALT+U to move there quickly to verify the settings.
-   When using a rule that does more than basic text searches, you may need to check the Use Regular Expression checkbox.

Advanced Text Rules

You can create more advanced text rules that utilize "and/or" conditions or other logical expressions. For example, if you only want to search for text units that contain two or more words, separate each word with ".*" (that is, a period followed by an asterisk with no spaces between the words or symbols). For example, you can use the following expression to search for text units containing both the words "JAWS" and "ZoomText:"

JAWS.*ZoomText

NOTE: The Use Regular Expression check box is normally left unchecked for simple text rules. A regular expression is a search string that uses special characters to help you define the search and match text patterns. To use more advanced searches you need to select this check box.

If you want to search for text units that contain any of several different words, separate each word with "|" (that is, a vertical bar with no spaces between the words or symbols). For example, you can use the following expression to search for text units containing either the words "JAWS" or "ZoomText:"

JAWS|ZoomText

Even more advanced expressions are possible as well. For example, you can use the following expression to search for text units containing any year starting with "19:"

19\d{2}\s

Tip: For more information on creating complex expressions like this, refer to the section Regular Expression Language Elements in the MSDN® Library.

Searching for Colors and Attributes

EXERCISE: Choose the Attributes and Color Rules Apply for Reading radio button in the Use Rule Type group to create rules that search for colors or attributes.

The sample document Freedom Scientific Software Solutions has some red text and some bold attributes in it for practice. Make sure you are at the top of the document first by pressing CTRL+HOME. If you don't already have it open, please do so now.

1.  Open the Skim Reading dialog box again if it is closed.
2.  Move to the Use Rule Type radio buttons and make sure the fourth one, Attributes and Color Rules Apply for Reading, is selected by pressing DOWN ARROW to move to it.
3.  Press TAB to move to the Rules History combo box. It should say New. If not, press HOME to find it at the top of the list. Press TAB to move through these new choices that have now become available.
4.  You land in the Text Color combo box. The default should be star, or asterisk.
5.  The next control is the Background Color combo box. Again, the default should be star, or asterisk. Press TAB again.
6.  Now you begin working through a series of checkboxes, all of which are unchecked by default, for various attributes. Press TAB to move through all of them. Keep in mind that when you start looking for attributes, the results are cumulative. In other words, when you check the bold and underlined checkboxes, only text that is BOTH bold and underline, simultaneously, is searched for.
7.  Continue to press TAB until you reach the Text Color combo box again. In this combo box, press the letter R and you should land on red.
8.  Press TAB again and you land in the combo box for Background Color. Unless you are looking for a specific background color, leave this on the star, for any background. So now, the search you're working on would find red text on any background.
9.  You could continue to press TAB to move through the rest of the controls, but the only one you need for this exercise is the Speak Unit combo box. Go ahead and press the access key to jump there directly, ALT+U. Set it to sentences for this rule.
10. Press ENTER to begin the summary. Explore it when finished. Did you hear something like four matches found?

When you are finished, press ESC to get out of the Skim Reading Summary. For more information on Skim Reading with JAWS be sure to read the DAISY book on Skim Reading. You can find it on the Training Downloads Web page.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, PlaceMarkers, custom page summary’ lang: en title: ‘Custom PlaceMarker Page Summary Step-by-Step Instructions’ —

1.  With JAWS running and with focus in your browser window, press INSERT+F2.
2.  Select Settings Center and press ENTER.
3.  Focus is in the Search edit box. Type in "Custom PlaceMarker Page" without the quotes.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to "Custom PlaceMarker Page Summary" in the filtered results of the tree view in Settings Center.
5.  Press SPACEBAR to choose to speak, list, or ignore PlaceMarkers. If you choose List PlaceMarkers, on page load JAWS reads the custom PlaceMarker page summary and displays the information in the Results Viewer.
6.  Press TAB to move to the OK button and activate it with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved. Settings Center closes. ﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, PlaceMarkers, custom page summary’ lang: en title: Using PlaceMarkers and the Custom PlaceMarker Page Summary —

[Surf's Up]

Using PlaceMarkers and the Custom PlaceMarker Page Summary

PlaceMarkers

PlaceMarkers allow you to quickly and easily navigate to commonly used areas of your favorite Web pages or HTML documents when using JAWS. You can use PlaceMarkers to jump between certain areas of a page, mark important sections of an HTML document, or indicate key form elements. For example, you could use PlaceMarkers to move to required fields in a complicated form or specific paragraphs in a long HTML document. Press the navigation quick key K to move to the next PlaceMarker, or press SHIFT+K to move to the prior PlaceMarker.

A random selection of fictitious stock quotes for today are listed on the E-Stocks sample page.

EXERCISE: Open the E-Stocks sample page, and follow along with the directions below to navigate to the table containing stock listings.

1.  Press CTRL+HOME to go to the top of the page.
2.  Press T to move to the table which contains stock listings.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW until you hear JAWS say "Change," which is the third column. The first column has the stock symbol, and the second column has the stock price.
4.  Next, press CTRL+ALT+DOWN ARROW to move down to the second row and JAWS should say ATVI, which is the stock symbol in column one, followed by a number and a percentage. The number and the percentage are the amount of change for ATVI stock since the page was last updated.

Inserting PlaceMarkers

EXERCISE: Follow the steps below to put several PlaceMarkers in this table.

1.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+K to display the PlaceMarker list.
2.  Press ENTER to choose the Add button. An edit box appears with the number and the percentage taken from the Web page. This text is highlighted, so type over it and give this PlaceMarker the name of "ATVI."
3.  Press ENTER to close the PlaceMarker dialog box.
4.  Press CTRL+ALT+DOWN ARROW two more times. You should hear JAWS identify that the focus is in the cell at the intersection of the row heading LEA and the column heading Change. You can press CTRL+ALT+NUM PAD 5 to read the current cell coordinates, column headings, and cell contents. Focus should be in column three, row four. This is the percentage change for the stock symbol LEA in column one.
5.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+K to display the PlaceMarker list.
6.  Press ENTER to create a new PlaceMarker. The text for the current price change and percentage should appear in the edit box that displays. Again, JAWS has taken text from the position of the virtual cursor on the page. Type in the stock symbol "LEA."
7.  Press ENTER to close this dialog box.
8.  Press CTRL+ALT+DOWN ARROW two more times to move to the row containing the percentage change for the stock symbol NT in column one.
9.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+K to display the PlaceMarker list.
10. Press ENTER to create a new PlaceMarker. Type "NT" to replace the suggested text taken from the Web page.
11. Press ENTER to close this dialog box.

Navigating with PlaceMarkers

EXERCISE: Now, practice moving from one PlaceMarker to the next by pressing the navigation quick key K to move forward and SHIFT+K to move backwards.

Notice that you will hear JAWS announce "wrapping to top" or "wrapping to bottom," depending on the direction you are going when JAWS reaches either the bottom or the top of the page.

EXERCISE: Next, take a few minutes to explore part of the PlaceMarker dialog box.

1.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+K to display the PlaceMarker list.
2.  Press INSERT+E to hear the default button in this dialog box. You should hear JAWS announce that the Add button is the default button.
3.  Press the SPACEBAR to select the first PlaceMarker in the list.
4.  Now press INSERT+E to read the default button. Notice that the default button is now Move To. This is a smart dialog box. Initially, when you first enter it, JAWS assumes that you want to add a new PlaceMarker. However, after you select an existing PlaceMarker in the list, JAWS assumes that you want to move to one of them.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW to select the third PlaceMarker, "NT."
6.  Press ENTER to move to this PlaceMarker. Notice that JAWS begins reading the text of the cell that the PlaceMarker is located in. JAWS remembers, down to the character, where you set your PlaceMarkers.

Sharing PlaceMarkers

PlaceMarkers remain in place even when you shut down JAWS and come back again. You can also share PlaceMarkers with other JAWS users. The PlaceMarkers are stored in the Settings\Enu\PlaceMarkers folder. The file name will be the URL of the Web page followed by the file extension PMI.

Other PlaceMarker Options

EXERCISE: Take a look at some of the other parts of the PlaceMarker dialog box.

1.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+K to display the PlaceMarker list.
2.  Press the SPACEBAR to select the first item in the list, which is the stock name ATVI in the second row.
3.  Press the TAB key to move to the Add button.
4.  Continue pressing the TAB key to explore the other buttons. You can change the name of a PlaceMarker, remove a PlaceMarker, or remove all PlaceMarkers.
5.  For now, press ESC to close the PlaceMarker list.

Custom PlaceMarker Page Summary

EXERCISE: Use the custom PlaceMarker page summary to automatically read the stocks you want to monitor whenever you visit this page.

To begin, do the following:

1.  Go to the E-Stocks sample page and press INSERT+V to display the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box. Focus is in the search edit box.
2.  Type "custom" without the quotes. The tree view below the search edit box changes to show settings containing the word custom.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Custom Page Summary in the General Options node of the tree view. By default, it shows Do Nothing.
4.  Use the SPACEBAR to choose either Speak PlaceMarkers On Page Load or List PlaceMarkers in Results Viewer On Page Load. If you choose Speak PlaceMarkers On Page Load, JAWS reads the custom PlaceMarker page summary from the PlaceMarker locations with speech only. If you choose List PlaceMarkers in Results Viewer On Page Load, JAWS displays the PlaceMarker page summary in the Results Viewer.
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR.
6.  Press F5 to refresh the E-Stocks sample page. You can also use the access key ALT+Q to activate the Update Quotes button on the page.

NOTE: Firefox uses the SHIFT key in addition for access keys on Web pages. If you are using Firefox, press ALT+SHIFT+Q to activate the Update Quotes button.

When the page refreshes, JAWS gives you a summary of the PlaceMarkers on this page with speech or with the Results Viewer, depending on how you set it. You hear each stock that you marked, and the change in that stock's value. This is an example of how you can use the PlaceMarkers and the custom PlaceMarker page summary to track changes and updates to Web pages that you visit frequently.

NOTE: To choose a custom PlaceMarker page summary that applies to all HTML pages for an entire domain, such as FreedomScientific.com or Google.com, use the Personalized Settings feature of JAWS. When you press INSERT+V to start Quick Settings do the following:

1.  Type "custom" without the quotes. The tree view below the search edit box changes to show settings containing the word custom.
2.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Custom Page Summary in the Personalized Web Settings node of the tree view. By default, it shows Do Nothing.
3.  Try changing the settings as described above.

Personalized settings remain in effect the next time you go to any page on that domain. Personalized settings are discussed in a later module.

To choose a custom PlaceMarker page summary setting that applies to all HTML pages, refer to Custom PlaceMarker Page Summary Step-by-Step Instructions.

Temporary PlaceMarkers

You can create one temporary PlaceMarker per Web page by pressing CTRL+WINDOWS Key+K in the spot where you want to place it. The temporary PlaceMarker is also saved in the PMI file. You can only have one temporary PlaceMarker per page, but you can move it to a different location by pressing CTRL+WINDOWS Key+K again in a new spot on the page.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, Quick Settings, Personalized Web Settings’ lang: en title: Personalized Web Page Settings —

[Surf's Up]

Personalized Web Page Settings

You can configure many JAWS settings for specific Web sites. Personalized settings apply to all pages of a given domain, such as CNN dot com or Freedom Scientific dot com. Some examples where using personalized settings could be useful might include:

-   Turn off heading announcement on Web sites that use headings to format information rather than structure it.
-   Turn off inline frames on sites that use them for advertising.
-   Turn off announcement of image map links on sites that do not provide alternate text for them, but do provide text links as well.
-   And more...

Make the various JAWS settings work for you to enhance your experiences on the Internet.

JAWS includes many configurable settings to access information on Web pages as efficiently as possible, and JAWS uses default settings that provide the most information on the majority of Web sites. However, there are many Web sites that are not designed with accessibility in mind or do not use HTML correctly. When using JAWS default settings, some of these Web pages may not provide enough information, while others may provide too much.

What Settings can be Personalized?

You can personalize many types of Web settings. For example:

-   Prevent Web sites from automatically refreshing, so the information does not reload and cause JAWS to read from the top of the page all over again.
-   Turn off graphic links on sites where alternate text is not provided or where the graphic links do not provide useful information.
-   Turn off heading announcement when headings are not used to structure information on a page.
-   Turn off navigation quick keys on pages that use certain types of access keys so the keys do not conflict.
-   Personalize Web settings for forms, frames, lists, and long quotations.

Personalizing Web Settings

Do the following to create or modify personalized settings for a Web page. Note that changes made are saved permanently to JSI files (for example, FreedomScientific.com.jsi) and do not apply to other Web pages. JSI files are stored in the PersonalizedSettings folder, which can be found by opening the Utilities menu from the JAWS window, selecting the Explore Utilities Folder option, and then choosing Explore My Settings.

1.  Press INSERT+V to open the Quick Settings dialog box. Focus is in the Search edit box.
2.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the Quick Settings tree view.
3.  Press P to move to the Personalize Web Settings group. If necessary, press RIGHT ARROW to expand the group.
4.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the different options and groups within Personalize Web Settings, and press SPACEBAR to make changes.
5.  After making all necessary changes, press TAB to move to the OK button and then press SPACEBAR to save changes and exit Quick Settings.

Sharing Personalized Settings

JAWS stores personalized settings information in JSI files. To share your personalized settings with other JAWS users

1.  From the JAWS application window, press ALT+U to open the Utilities menu and press X to activate the Explore Utilities Folder option.
2.  Navigate to Explore My Settings and press ENTER. A folder opens that contains all of the files you have had JAWS modify or create for you.
3.  Select the folder PersonalizedSettings and press ENTER to open it.
4.  Locate the JSI file with the domain name of the page that uses the personalized settings you want to share. For example: "Google.com.jsi."
5.  Copy this file and distribute it to others. Those you share your JSI file with need to copy the JSI file into their user folder on their computer following the steps above. They can now use that HTML page with your personalized settings.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, speech and sounds schemes, HTML attributes, select a scheme, training mode’ lang: en title: Speech and Sounds Schemes —

[Surf's Up]

Speech and Sounds Schemes

Have you ever wanted to hear things differently, perhaps to speed up your reading? Or perhaps you want to hear items you may be missing that you could read if only you knew they were there? If a button, check box, or other control within a Web page could be identified with a different voice, rather than using extra speech, it would mean you would have less to listen to.

Speech and sounds schemes let you use voices, spoken text, or sounds to identify various elements of Web pages, dialog boxes, and documents. For example, you could use different notes from a piano to indicate different heading levels. You can also assign speech or a sound to specific attributes such as HTML attributes or text attributes in a word processing document. Many Web page elements have both ALT and TITLE attributes. JAWS reads the ALT attribute by default and you may never know that a title is available. Perhaps the title would give you more information. Alternatively, you might want JAWS to identify bold text in a document by reading it in a deep voice. When you use speech and sounds schemes to alter the way JAWS reads information, you can store your associations as a scheme that you can apply at any time. You can also easily switch between schemes.

Tip: To change the active scheme, press INSERT+ALT+S. Use the arrow keys to select a new scheme and then press ENTER. This scheme remains the active scheme until you change it again.

EXERCISE: Explore the Select a Scheme dialog box.

1.  Press INSERT+ALT+S.
2.  Press UP or DOWN ARROW to explore the choices in the list.
3.  Make sure that Classic is the one you have selected before you press ENTER to close the dialog box, and move on with the lesson.

To open the Modify Schemes dialog box do the following:

1.  In Chrome, press INSERT+F2.
2.  Select Settings Center and press ENTER.
3.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+D to switch to the default file.
4.  Focus is in the Search edit box. Type in "scheme" without the quotes.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to "Active Speech and Sounds Scheme" in the filtered results of the tree view in Settings Center. You can switch schemes here by pressing SPACEBAR. The Settings Center has two sides. On the left is the tree view and on the right is the configuration display pane. As you move through the tree view, a sighted user can simultaneously track cursor movement using the configuration display pane.
6.  Press F6 to move from the tree view to the configuration display pane. This is necessary when typing in an edit or edit spin box. Focus should be on the Select Speech and Sounds Scheme combo box. Classic will be selected there unless you have changed schemes prior to now.
7.  Press TAB. Focus moves to the read only text area for Scheme Description.
8.  Press TAB again. Focus moves to the Modify Schemes button.
9.  Press TAB once more and focus moves back to the Select Speech and Sounds Scheme combo box. Make sure that Classic is selected here before going any farther.
10. Now, press F6 to go back to the tree view. Focus moves back to the Select Speech and Sounds Scheme node of the tree view. Don't press SPACEBAR at the moment. Pressing SPACEBAR here will cause items in the combo box to change.
11. Press DOWN ARROW to move to Scheme Description. Do you notice how the tree view corresponds to the controls in the configuration display pane?
12. Press DOWN ARROW again to move to Modify Schemes in the tree view.
13. Now, press SPACEBAR on this and the Modify Schemes dialog box opens.

Move on now to the next section where you will create a new scheme.

Creating a New Scheme

A scheme is a collection of settings that you save as a single group. You can use schemes to quickly customize your JAWS speech and sound settings. You can switch between schemes quickly. Some examples might include schemes for the following situations:

-   Proofreading word processing documents
-   Leisurely reading, without proofreading
-   Searching for text with certain attributes, such as bold, underline, or italics
-   Announcing more options on certain Web pages that may not be apparently available by just reading the text on the screen

EXERCISE: Use JAWS to create a new scheme by following the steps below. If you already have the Modify Schemes dialog box open, skip ahead to step eight below:

1.  In Chrome, press INSERT+F2.
2.  Select Settings Center and press ENTER.
3.  Press CTRL+SHIFT+D to switch to the default file.
4.  Focus is in the Search edit box. Type in "scheme" without the quotes.
5.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to Modify Schemes in the tree view.
6.  Now, press SPACEBAR on this and the Modify Schemes dialog box opens.
7.  In the Select Speech and Sounds Scheme combo box, make sure that Classic is selected before continuing with the exercise. If it is not, press the letter C several times to move through all of the items that start with that letter to find it.
8.  Press TAB to move through the dialog box and choose the Create New Scheme button. An Untitled - Edit Scheme multi page dialog box opens with focus on the General tab page. The cursor is in the Scheme Description edit area. The text description from the classic scheme is highlighted there.
9.  For now, type something like "My new scheme."
10. Press TAB to move to the OK button, and activate it by pressing SPACEBAR. The Save As dialog box appears.
11. Give the new scheme a name, such as "My Test Scheme," and press ENTER. Focus returns to the Modify Scheme dialog box, with focus on the Create New Scheme button.
12. Press ALT+S to save the current scheme.
13. Press TAB to move to the OK button, and press SPACEBAR to activate it. A message appears asking, "Do you want to make your practice scheme the active scheme for Default (All Applications)?" For now, choose the NO button. This closes the Modify Scheme dialog box, returning focus to the tree view of JAWS Settings Center.
14. Press TAB to move to the OK button and activate it with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved. Settings Center closes.

EXERCISE: The Modify Scheme dialog box is a multi-page dialog box composed of several different tab pages. In the next exercise you will take a look at the dialog box in more detail using the scheme you just created. You will use the Edit Scheme dialog box to assign speech or a sound to almost any element that JAWS recognizes.

Open the Modify Schemes dialog box again:

-   INSERT+F2
-   Settings Center
-   CTRL+SHIFT+D to select the default file
-   In the Search edit box type in "scheme" without the quotes
-   DOWN ARROW to move to Modify Schemes in the tree view
-   SPACEBAR and the Modify Schemes dialog box opens

If you are continuing this exercise immediately after the previous exercise, the active scheme in the list should be "Classic." Find your practice scheme in the list of available schemes before continuing.

Press TAB to move to and SPACEBAR to activate the Edit Selected Scheme button. Focus is in the Scheme Description edit box of your new scheme, on the General tab page where you entered a description previously. You can modify this text any time by repeating these steps to get here.

Press CTRL+TAB to move to the Control Type tab.

Use the UP or DOWN ARROW keys to move through and explore the list of control types. Notice that all of the controls are set to speak the control type using the normal voice.

For the time being, continue to press CTRL+TAB and explore all of the tab pages in this dialog box. There are tab pages you can use to modify the way JAWS reads control states, attributes, font names, font sizes, colors, indentation, HTML attributes, and more. Eventually, focus cycles back to the General tab.

If you plan to continue with the next series of instructions, you can leave this dialog box open. If not, choose the Cancel button and focus returns to the JAWS Settings Center.

Press TAB to move to either the OK button to save changes or the Cancel button to discard any changes. Activate the button with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved, or not, depending on which button you choose. Settings Center closes.

Assigning Sounds to HTML Elements

You may recall that previously in the Surf's Up lesson on Dealing with Difficult Pages, there was a link for the Training and Certification web page that had a link in the foreground and a title attribute in the background. If you did not know that the title attribute was there, you might never find and read the extra information the author of the page intended to provide.

EXERCISE: In this section, you will change your scheme so it associates a sound with an HTML element such as a title attribute. To begin, open the Modify Schemes dialog box, if necessary, and make sure you select the scheme you created. Then, choose the Edit Selected Scheme button and do the following:

1.  Press CTRL+TAB until you move to the HTML tab page. There are already several different HTML elements that JAWS identifies listed here.
2.  Press DOWN ARROW to explore the list. Did you notice that Title is not in the list? We'll add it.
3.  Press TAB to move to the Add button, and activate it with the SPACEBAR. Alternatively, you could also press the access key ALT+A to activate the Add button without having to move to it first.
4.  Type the word title in the Add HTML Element Attribute edit field.
5.  Press ENTER to activate the Next button. A Select Behavior dialog box appears asking if you want to speak the item or play a sound when a title attribute is encountered on a Web page.
6.  Press DOWN ARROW to select the Play Sound radio button.
7.  Press ENTER to activate the Next button. The Select Sound dialog box appears with a list of over one hundred sounds that are included with JAWS.
8.  Press ALT+P or SPACEBAR to sample any sound in the list as you press UP or DOWN ARROW to move through the list.

NOTE: If you want to hear a sound while you are also listening to speech, like text on a Web page being read, the sound should be fairly crisp and loud enough to hear.

9.  For this exercise, press M until you select the MetalDing.wav sound. Press ALT+P to hear a preview of this sound. After you have previewed this sound, press ENTER. The Select Sound dialog box closes and focus returns to the Edit Scheme dialog box. Notice that now you have a rule defined for title that reads, "title, play sound, MetalDing.wav" in the list of attributes that JAWS will now look for. You can press INSERT+UP ARROW to re-read the item in the list.
10. Press TAB to move to the OK button, and activate it with the SPACEBAR. Focus returns to the Edit Selected Scheme button in the Modify Scheme dialog box.
11. Press ALT+S to activate the Save Selected Scheme button.
12. Press TAB to move to the OK button, and activate it with the SPACEBAR. A message appears asking, "Do you want to make your practice scheme the active scheme for Default (All Applications)?" For now, choose the NO button. Focus returns to JAWS Settings Center.
13. Press TAB to move to the OK button and activate it with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved. Settings Center closes.
14. Switch to your test scheme. Press INSERT+ALT+S and find it in the list. Once you find it in the list, press ENTER to close the Select a Scheme dialog box.
15. The line below this has the same example of a link with both screen text and a title attribute that was on the page with the lesson on Dealing with Difficult Pages. Press DOWN ARROW to move to the link. You should hear the text of the link spoken as well as the MetalDing.wav sound.

Training and Certification

Now that you hear the MetalDing sound played, you know that in addition to the text of the link, which is visible on the screen, there is also a title attribute for this link. The title is not visible on the screen, but you know it is there. Do you remember how to switch JAWS so that it can read the title information instead of the screen text for this link?

EXERCISE: Follow the steps below to switch JAWS to read the title information.

1.  Press INSERT+V to open the Quick Settings dialog box. Focus is in the search edit box.
2.  Type text links in the search edit box. Quick Settings filters out all results that do not match the search phrase.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW until you select "Text Links show Using - Screen Text."
4.  Press SPACEBAR to toggle this until you hear "text Links show Using - Title."
5.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and then activate it with the SPACEBAR. The Quick Settings dialog box closes.
6.  Now re-read the link.
7.  Open the JAWS list of links with INSERT+F7 and notice the title now appears there as well.
8.  Press ESC to get out of the list of links when you are finished.

NOTE: Remember to repeat the steps above and change JAWS back to Text Links Show Using - Screen Text when you are finished.

Experiment with the other HTML elements available in the Modify Scheme dialog box. You can assign sounds to headings, form controls, graphics, frames, image maps, tables, and more.

Ignoring HTML Attributes

What if you don't want to hear some attributes that JAWS speaks on Web pages? For example, perhaps you don't want to hear JAWS say, "Clickable," when you encounter links or other content that includes OnClick attribute. JAWS also has the ability to ignore HTML attributes.

EXERCISE: To ignore an HTML attribute, do the following:

1.  In the Modify Scheme dialog box select the scheme you want to modify. Then activate the Edit Selected Scheme button.
2.  Press CTRL+TAB to move to the HTML tab. This tab contains a list of HTML attributes that have already been defined. OnClick is one of these. For this exercise, press DOWN ARROW until you select "OnClick" in the list.
3.  Press the TAB key one time to move to the Behavior group of radio buttons. Press DOWN ARROW to move to and select the Ignore radio button.
4.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and activate it with the SPACEBAR. Focus returns to the Edit Selected Scheme button in the Modify Scheme dialog box.
5.  Press ALT+S to activate the Save Current Scheme button.
6.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and activate it with the SPACEBAR. Focus returns to JAWS Settings Center.
7.  Press TAB to move to the OK button and activate it with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved. Settings Center closes.

Create a Scheme to Speak Bold Text Using the Bold Voice Alias

EXERCISE: In this exercise you will create a scheme that looks for bold text and speaks it in a different voice.

You can use voice aliases to have JAWS announce certain items, attributes, or states in a different voice. In this section, you will assign a voice alias to bold text. To begin, open the Modify Scheme dialog box and then do the following:

1.  In the Select Scheme combo box, select the scheme you created earlier, and then choose the Edit Selected Scheme button.
2.  Press CTRL+TAB until you move to the Attributes tab. You are in a list of attributes. This list contains one definition for the Default setting, which is set to ignore attributes, and a few other definitions already created by Freedom Scientific.
3.  Press ALT+A to choose the Add button. An Add Attribute dialog box opens with a list of check boxes you can choose for different attributes such as bold, underline, italics, and more.
4.  Press SPACEBAR to select the Bold check box. Feel free to explore the other items you could check, but for this exercise, only check bold. When you are finished exploring, choose Next. The Select Behavior dialog box of radio buttons appears.

NOTE: If you check multiple items here ALL items must be present in the same text in order to match what you are looking for. In other words, if you select both bold and underline, the text must have both attributes present to match the rule. If you want to look for EITHER bold OR underline, you would create a separate rule for each.

5.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to and select the Speak Item Text Using Voice radio button, and then choose Next. The Select Voice Alias dialog box appears with a list of over thirty different voice aliases that Freedom Scientific has already created.
6.  Use the arrow keys to select the BoldVoice voice alias, and then press ENTER to activate the Finish button.
7.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and activate it with the SPACEBAR. Focus returns to the Edit Selected Scheme button in the Modify Scheme dialog box.
8.  Press ALT+S to activate the Save Current Scheme button.
9.  Press TAB to move to the OK button, and activate it with the SPACEBAR. Focus returns to JAWS Settings Center.
10. Press TAB to move to the OK button and activate it with the SPACEBAR. The changes are made and saved. Settings Center closes.

You may need to switch to your new scheme to test your voice alias. Press INSERT+ALT+S to open the Select a Scheme dialog box. If your scheme is not selected, scroll up or down and choose your scheme. Test it by reading some of the lines of text on this page that have bold text. JAWS should read those words in a deeper voice. This makes it very easy to determine exactly which words appear in bold text.

Speech and Sounds Training Mode

Training mode helps you familiarize yourself with how the active scheme uses sounds to provide information. When training mode is on, JAWS announces detailed information for items, states, and attributes as well as the sounds assigned to them in the active scheme. You hear the sound, and then JAWS announces the same information you hear when using the Classic scheme.

Tip: Training mode also announces information for items, states, and attributes that the active scheme ignores.

Since the sound assignments made by the scheme's creator may not be immediately obvious, training mode can help you determine the purpose of each sound. For example, if a scheme uses two different sounds to indicate the state of a check box, you might not be able to tell which sound indicates that the check box is selected. If training mode is on, JAWS plays the sound and then says, "checked" or "not checked."

To turn training mode on or off:

1.  Press INSERT+ALT+S.
2.  To turn training mode on, select Toggle Speech and Sounds Training Mode On and press ENTER. If you want to turn training mode off, select Toggle Speech and Sounds Training Mode Off and press ENTER.

Back          Next

﻿— lang: en title: Customer Feedback —

[Navigation tabs]

Global Corp - Customer Response Form

Please complete the following form and then type your question in the space provided. When you are finished, click Submit. We will make every effort to respond to your concern within 24 hours. If you have any questions for the Webmaster, click here.

Full Name

Address
AL AK AL AZ CA CO CT DC DE FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA MA MD ME MI MN MO MS MT NC ND NE NH NJ NM NV NY OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VA VT WA WI WV WY

Please rate your experience with Global Corp:

[Click to select if you want to indicate a positive experience.] [Click to select if you want to indicate a neutral or fair experience.] [Click to select if you want to indicate a poor experience.]

[Submit link]

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, custom labels, customize web page elements, label HTML elements’ lang: en title: Using Custom Labels —

[Surf's Up]

Using Custom Labels

The Custom Labels feature is an extremely flexible and versatile way to customize Web pages to suit your individual needs. JAWS allows you to assign custom text labels to almost any HTML element that you can move to by pressing the TAB key. These elements include text links, graphic links, form fields, and buttons. You can also label images on Web pages. JAWS reads these custom labels instead of the identifying text assigned to the elements by the Web page author. JAWS also uses custom labels to identify elements when they appear in lists, such as the list of form fields that displays when you press INSERT+F5.

You can use this feature to customize the elements of any Web page to help you navigate the page, reduce verbosity, compensate for incomplete or poorly labeled elements, and similar functions. Redefine the labels for entire Web forms or applications so the names are more useful and meaningful to you. Customize Web pages so that links and graphics provide more information and help you find what you need right away. The Custom Labels feature provides unmatched flexibility in the way you read Web pages.

NOTE: JAWS saves the labels you assign to a Web page so they are available each time you use that page. In addition, the labels you create are applied to identical elements any time they appear in that page's domain. The domain is usually the first part of the page's Web address. For example, if you assign a label to a button, JAWS reads that label any time you encounter the button on any Web page within that domain. Custom labels are saved in JSI files in the Settings\Enu\PersonalizedSettings folder.

The following exercises demonstrate how you can use custom labels to make Web pages easier to use and more informative.

Labeling an Image Map

The image at the very top of the Customer Response Form depicts three tabs that users can click to navigate to other sections of the site. When JAWS reads this image, it says, "Graphic navigation tabs." This graphic is a special type called an image map. Image maps have one or more areas on them that act like links. Mouse users can click these areas, and JAWS users can press ENTER to activate these links.

EXERCISE: The image map on the sample Customer Response Form is not coded to work well with JAWS. In this exercise, you'll use custom labels to make the image map easier to use:

1.  Open the Customer Response Form sample Web page.
2.  Press CTRL+HOME to move to the top of the page.
3.  Press DOWN ARROW until you hear JAWS announce "image map link tab2." The information provided by the page author is not very helpful in determining what this link actually does.
4.  Press ENTER to activate the link. The message that displays tells you what this link does. On a real Web page, the link would take you to another page without displaying the message. You would have to explore the site more thoroughly to discover what the link actually does.
5.  After reading the message, press ENTER to close this dialog box.

TIP: Normally, if you follow a link to see what it does, you can return to the original page by pressing ALT+LEFT ARROW.

6.  Press INSERT+F2. Select "Custom Label," and press ENTER to assign a custom label to this image map link.
7.  Since this link takes you to the Products page, type "Products" and press ENTER.
8.  Press DOWN ARROW to read the next image map link. This link also doesn't have a good description. Press ENTER to find out what this link does.
9.  After reading the message, press ENTER to close this dialog box.
10. Next, press INSERT+CTRL+TAB. This keystroke is a shortcut you can use to label an HTML element.
11. Since this image map link takes you to the Shopping page, type "Shopping," and press ENTER.
12. Press CTRL+HOME and then begin reading the page again. Notice that JAWS now reads the labels you assigned to the image map links instead of "tab2" and "tab3."

JAWS Tip: JAWS also uses the custom label whenever the element appears in an HTML list. Press INSERT+F7. Notice that the labels you created are used to indicate the image map links in the list instead of "tab2" and "tab3."

Labeling a Text Link

Often times, the actual text of a link will not be very descriptive. You can use custom labels to change the text of a link. Use this feature to shorten wordy links or add more description to short links.

EXERCISE: Follow along with the steps below to see how you can use JAWS to label text links.

1.  Open the Customer Response Form sample Web page.
2.  Press INSERT+F7 to display a list of links on the page. Find the link named "click here." That name isn't very descriptive. Select the link "click here" and choose Move to Link to go to the link's location on the page so you can find out more about it.
3.  Press ALT+NUM PAD 5 to read the sentence this link appears in. From the context of the sentence, you can determine that the link allows you to send e-mail to the Webmaster.
4.  Press INSERT+CTRL+TAB to label this link.
5.  Type "Send the Webmaster e-mail" without the quotes, and then press ENTER.
6.  Press ALT+NUM PAD 5 to read the sentence again. Notice that JAWS reads your label instead of the words "click here."
7.  Press INSERT+F7 again. The entry "click here" that was previously in the list has been replaced by "Send the Webmaster e-mail." Any time you assign a custom label, JAWS displays that label when the element appears in HTML lists.
8.  Press ESC to close the list of links when you are finished.

Labeling Form Fields

You can also assign custom labels to form fields and controls, such as edit boxes, radio buttons, combo boxes, check boxes, and buttons.

EXERCISE: In this exercise you'll assign custom labels to some unlabeled edit fields.

1.  Open the Customer Response Form sample Web page.
2.  Press F to move to the first form field on the page. This form is poorly designed. Most of the fields are labeled incorrectly or aren't labeled at all. Press INSERT+F5 to display a list of form fields. You can see that the majority of fields in this list are unlabeled.
3.  Press E several times to move through the first three edit boxes on the page. JAWS announces the label for the first field as "full name" but the next two edit fields have no label. In reality, the first field should be labeled "first name," the second field should be labeled "middle initial," and the third field should be labeled "last name."
4.  Press SHIFT+E twice to return to the first edit box, and then press INSERT+CTRL+TAB.
5.  Type "First Name" and press ENTER to label this field. Assign meaningful labels to the other two edit boxes using the Custom Label command (INSERT+CTRL+TAB).
6.  Press F until you hear, "Address." Press the TAB key four times and listen to JAWS announce each address-related field. See if you can determine the purpose of each field and then assign each a meaningful custom label.
7.  When you've finished, press X. This command moves you to the first of three check boxes that you can use to indicate your level of customer satisfaction. Each check box is labeled with an image (a happy face, an indifferent face, and an angry face). Though the descriptions you hear for the check boxes are long, they are accurate and coded correctly. These particular descriptions come from the images' ALT text. In this case, the Web author primarily intended to use this ALT text to provide further information to sighted users when they move the mouse pointer over the image.
8.  Use custom labels to shorten these verbose labels. Press INSERT+CTRL+TAB, type "Good," and press ENTER.
9.  Press X to move to the next check box and give it the label "Fair." Then press X again and label the last check box "Poor."
10. Press E to move to an unlabeled multiline edit box. From the introductory paragraph and the initial text, you can deduce that this area is where you enter your comments. Press INSERT+CTRL+TAB, type "Comments," and press ENTER.
11. Press INSERT+F5 to review all of the form fields on this page. JAWS displays all the fields using the custom labels you assigned to them. This form should be much easier to fill out now. Go ahead and fill out the form to see how you've used custom labels to greatly enhance its usability.

Sharing Custom Labels

After you assign some custom labels to a page, you can share those labels with other users. Custom labels are saved in JSI files, just like personalized Web settings. To share your custom labels with other JAWS users

1.  From the JAWS application window, press ALT+U to open the Utilities menu and press X to activate the Explore Utilities Folder option.
2.  Navigate to Explore My Settings and press ENTER. A folder opens that contains all of the files you have had JAWS modify or create for you.
3.  Select the folder PersonalizedSettings and press ENTER to open it.
4.  Locate the JSI file with the domain name of the page that contains the custom labels you want to share. For example: "Google.com.jsi."
5.  Copy this file and distribute it to others. Those you share your JSI file with need to copy the JSI file into their user folder on their computer following the steps above. They can now use that HTML page with your custom labels.

Deleting Custom Labels

You can delete specific custom labels at any time, or you can delete all custom labels on a page. To delete an element's label, move to it with standard JAWS reading commands, the TAB key, a Navigation Quick Key, or a JAWS HTML list. Then, press INSERT+F2, select "Custom Label Delete," and press ENTER. JAWS will now read the original identifying text instead of your custom label.

To delete all custom labels on the current page, press INSERT+F2, select "Custom Label Delete All," and press ENTER.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, search, search engines, Google, Yahoo’ lang: en title: Using Search Engines to Find Information on the Web —

[Surf's Up]

Using Search Engines to Find Information on the Web

Search Engines

Search engines on the World Wide Web are remotely accessible programs that let you do keyword searches for information on the Internet. There are several types of search engines and searches may cover titles of documents, URL's, headers, or full text. Keep in mind that the results you get from one search engine may not match the results you get from another search engine. In fact, they are often different due to the way each search engine behaves. Therefore, it may actually be beneficial to use more than one search engine on a regular basis.

In this section, we briefly look at Google and Yahoo!. Web pages are often dynamic and can change at any time. As a result, you may find that if either site changes, your experience with JAWS may be different than what is described here.

Google

EXERCISE: Use the link below to go to the Google web site and follow along with the instructions.

When you first go to the Google web site there is a blinking cursor in the search edit box near the middle of the page. But you can also perform searches right from the address bar. To move to the address bar, just press ALT+D. Either way, as you begin typing, an autocomplete list may appear. You can press DOWN ARROW to move through the list and then ENTER to perform a search, or you can simply continue typing what you are searching for without using the list.

After you have typed in some text, press ENTER to activate the Search button. Results appear on the page below. We will discuss some techniques for finding the results on the page in a moment. But first, Google only returns web pages that contain all of the words in your query. If you find that you get too many "hits" or web pages that match your search, you can enter more words in your search query to narrow the choices.

Using good keywords gives you better results. Be as specific as you can. For example, a search for the keyword "musicians" will yield far more results than a search for the keywords "Elvis Presley." You do not need to include "and" between terms, but the order in which you type your keywords will affect the search results. You can also search for a specific phrase by including words in quotation marks. Google searches are not case sensitive.

You can also use the following items within your keywords for Google searches:

- (minus) sign. Causes Google to exclude a word from your search. For example, "JAWS" can refer to a screen reading software or a famous movie. You can exclude many of the movie-related hits by searching for "JAWS -movie." (Be sure to include a space before the minus sign and no spaces between the minus sign and the word "movie.") Searches for JAWS with different conditions yielded the following results:

-   JAWS, about 1,690,000,000 results
-   JAWS windows -movie, still yields about the same number of results, but you find much more information about JAWS screen reader and very little, if any, information about movies. There will most likely still be links to videos on YouTube or other sources.
-   "JAWS screen reader" (in quotes), about 49,600 results

As you narrow your search and use better keywords, you get more relevant results. Putting a phrase into quotes tells Google to look for the exact words in that exact order.

Try typing different things such as names, phone numbers, and more to find people or things.

Try a search for Freedom Scientific. Use this link to go to the Google web site. On the results page, there are a couple of things you can do to get more information about the results of the search:

-   The statistics of your search are typically placed between the search edit box and the search results. You can use the JAWS find command CTRL+F to look for the word "Results," and then read that line. For example, when testing this, the search found, "About 203,000,000 results (0.80 seconds)." This can be useful if you need to narrow the search.
-   Google uses a "main" region to guide you to the search results. You can press R to move from one region to another.
-   The items found as a result of your search are placed on the page as both links and headings. You can press the navigation quick key H to move quickly among the headings that match your search. Since they are also links, you can press ENTER to activate them and move to those web pages of interest.
-   Below each heading (and link) that match your search is a short synopsis of what that page is about. After pressing H to move to a heading (link), just press DOWN ARROW to read the text below it for more information.
-   Remember, you can also press SHIFT+H to move backwards.
-   There is also a good structure to the headings. The search results are typically listed after a heading level two. The matches found for the search are typically level three headings.

EXERCISE: Google uses regions to make navigation easier. Explore them by pressing R to move from region to region, and then press DOWN ARROW to move into the next section.

You can also read through the search results page using normal reading keys or use INSERT+F7 to open the list of links and see what related links were found. Use the Move to Link button in the links list, ALT+M, to move to a particular link and then down arrow through the associated text to find out if this might be what you are looking for.

In addition to the information displayed on the initial results page, there are often links to more pages of information that meet your search criteria. These pages are reached by activating the link for the number of the page. Usually you will find links for additional pages 2 through 10 near the bottom of each page, along with a Next link. Each page beyond the first page also contains a number of items that match your search.

Google Search Tools

Google also provides easy-to-use search tools. For example:

-   "Weather Chicago" yields the current weather in Chicago
-   "25 kilometers in miles" converts kilometers to miles
-   "Define screen magnification" yields definitions for screen magnification
-   "Seafood restaurants 33716" yields restaurants that serve seafood in or near that zip code
-   And so on...

NOTE: For both the Google web site and the Yahoo! web site discussed in the next section, be sure to check out the other links on their sites for Advanced Search, Help topics, and more.

Yahoo!.com

Yahoo! is another search engine that many people use. The main Yahoo! page also has more information on it, such as sports and news headlines, entertainment links, and links to many other items. This tends to cause the page to appear more cluttered than the Google site, but may prove itself useful to you as well. As with Google, when you first go to the Yahoo! web site there is a blinking cursor in an edit box.

Forms mode comes on automatically when you get to a web page which has the focus set to a blinking cursor in an edit box. If for some reason forms mode does not come on automatically on your computer, you can also press ENTER to go into forms mode, or you can press INSERT+F5 to open the Select a Form Field dialog box for JAWS.

TIP: Mouse users can also click inside edit boxes and forms mode comes on automatically.

After you have typed in some text, press ENTER to activate the Search button.

Yahoo! behaves very much the same way as Google and displays a list of hits of matching items. These are links to further resources, and each link here also has a text description taken from that source that matches your query.

After a Yahoo! results page loads, press the letter H to move to the different headings on the page. Since the headings are also links, pressing ENTER on one takes you to the web page indicated. Beneath each heading/link is text that describes a little bit about that page. Press INSERT+F7 to use the list of links to explore the links, or you can also press TAB to move from one link to another.

To find the number of matches, use the JAWS Find and look for the word "results" without the quotes. You may have to use the function key F3 to repeat the JAWS find. The results for Yahoo! are typically near the bottom of the page, so you may find the number of matches more quickly by pressing SHIFT+F3 to search backwards.

Yahoo! also has links to other results pages, just as Google does. These links show as numbers 2 through 5, along with a Next link, and are located near the bottom of the page.

Going Beyond the Search Engine Results Page

OK, so what happens when you choose one of the links you find on a search engine page? What strategies do you use to find the information you were initially searching for on the resulting page?

ANSWER: All of the strategies you learned in this series of Surf's Up lessons, including:

Use N to jump past a series of links to move to the next block of text that has at least 25 characters without a link.

Use the list of links (INSERT+F7) to look for links that begin with specific words.

Use the list of headings (INSERT+F6) to look for structure in the headings on a page.

Use the JAWS Find to search for words or phrases on a web page.

Look for regions.

Use the JAWS Quick Settings dialog box (INSERT+V) to change things as needed such as:

-   Stop page refreshes
-   Search for <title> attributes, acronyms, abbreviations, and more.

Use the Custom Label feature of JAWS to label unlabeled links or unlabeled form fields on pages that you visit often.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, HTML help, search help, table of contents, index, favorites, navigating help’ lang: en title: Using HTML Help Systems —

[Surf's Up]

Using HTML Help Systems

Help information for software is often presented in HTML format. You can read and navigate these Help systems just like Web sites on the Internet. A type of help system called HTML Help is used in many different kinds of programs, including JAWS. In addition to presenting information as HTML pages, an HTML Help system can also have an index, full text search capability, glossary, table of contents, and other features. In this section, you will learn how to use the comprehensive search and navigation features of HTML Help systems.

Table of Contents

The table of contents is one of the best ways to browse the various subject matter contained in the Help system. A table of contents contains one or more books. Books contain several related topics.

EXERCISE: In the exercise below, you will use the JAWS Help system to learn how to navigate the table of contents.

1.  In the JAWS window, open the Help menu and choose Help Topics. Alternatively, just press F1 from within the JAWS window.
2.  Hold CTRL and press the TAB key until you hear "Table of Contents page." Notice that in the JAWS help there are four tabs in this pane: Table of Contents, Index, Search, and Favorites.
3.  Use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to explore the table of contents. As you move through the table of contents, you are moving through books or topics in a tree view. If a book is closed, you cannot see what topics it contains.
4.  Select the book Using the Internet with JAWS, and then press RIGHT ARROW to open it.
5.  Use the DOWN ARROW key to explore the topics contained in the book you just opened. Sometimes, in addition to several topics, books can contain other books. When you press down arrow the first time you hear JAWS say, "Level one." If you continue to press DOWN ARROW you will eventually hear JAWS say "Level zero" and the name of the next book below in the tree, which is closed. Level zero is the top level. As you open and close books and topics, JAWS announces when you change levels. As long as the level does not change when moving up or down, you do not hear the level repeated.
6.  Select the book Navigating Web Pages, and press RIGHT ARROW to open it.
7.  Press DOWN ARROW to move to the next level. JAWS tells you that you have moved to level two. You can think of these different levels as having a type of outline structure. Continue to press UP or DOWN ARROW until you select the topic Navigation Quick Keys.
8.  Press ENTER to open this topic. The information it contains is displayed in the topic pane on the right side of the window.
9.  Press F6 to switch to the topic pane. JAWS automatically begins reading the text in the topic pane. You can use the standard JAWS reading and navigation commands to read this topic. You can use any command or feature that you can use normally with JAWS in a web browser, such as pressing INSERT+F7 to view a list of links, or H to move from one heading to another.
10. When you are finished reading you can press F6 again to move back to the tree view of books and topics. F6 is a command that switches between the two panes of the help window.

Index

The index of an HTML Help system lets you search by keyword. Indexes are useful for finding specific information about certain subjects.

EXERCISE: In this exercise you will use the JAWS help system to learn how to find information in an index.

1.  In JAWS, open the Help menu and choose Help Topics. Alternatively, just press F1 from within the JAWS window.
2.  If you are continuing from the previous exercise, first make sure that focus is back in the tree view of books and topics. If you are not certain, press F6 until you hear JAWS announce the tree view.
3.  Hold CTRL and press the TAB key until you move to the Index tab page.
4.  Let's assume you want to look up information about how to work with graphics. Type the word graphic.
5.  Press TAB to move to the list of indexed keywords. The JAWS Help system has selected the closest matching keyword, which is "Graphic Label." This isn't the keyword you are looking for.
6.  Use the arrow keys to explore the topics above and below the keyword you found. Then put the focus on the keywords "Graphics Labeler."
7.  Press ENTER on "Graphics Labeler." There is more than one Help topic associated with these keywords. Press the ARROW keys to explore the topics.
8.  Select Overview of the JAWS Utilities, and then press ENTER.
9.  Next, press F6 to move to the topic pane, and read the information about the topic.
10. Press F6 to move back to the keyword entry box. Delete any word or phrase there, and then type cursors.
11. Next, press TAB to move to that word in the list of keywords.
12. Press DOWN ARROW to select the next keyword, which is "JAWS cursor."
13. Continue to press DOWN ARROW to explore these. They are subkeywords of the term "cursors." For example, JAWS cursor, PC cursor, and Virtual PC cursor. Subkeywords are used to provide more specific information about a broad or more general topic. For example, an index could have the term "Dogs" followed by the subkeywords "German Shepherd," "Golden Retriever," "Labrador," and so on.

Searching the Help System

You can use a full-text search to find information on keywords that don't appear in the index or to find all topics where a certain word or phrase is used.

EXERCISE: Next, you'll learn how to use the JAWS Help system's full text search feature.

1.  In JAWS, open the Help menu and choose Help Topics. Alternatively, just press F1 from within the JAWS window.
2.  Hold CTRL and press the TAB key until you move to the Search tab page.

NOTE: If you are continuing from the exercise above you may need to press F6 to move back to the left side of the window first.

3.  Type the phrase, mouse pointer, and then press ENTER.
4.  Press TAB to move to the list of topics that contain the words you searched for. Make a note of how many topics are found. Use the UP and DOWN ARROW keys to explore this list. Notice that many topics were retrieved by the search. This is because the HTML Help system was looking for any topics that contained both of the two words contained in the first search. However, it was not looking to see if the words were next to each other in the text, or even if they were in the same sentence. It just found all topics containing both words at least once somewhere within each topic.

NOTE: The search may also have found larger words that contain part of the text you search for. For example, the word "pointer" might be found as part of the plural "pointers."

5.  Press ALT+W to move back to the keyword entry box. Type quotation marks around the phrase "mouse pointer," and then press ENTER to retry the search.
6.  Press TAB to move to the search results list to view the results. Notice that about half as many topics were found this time. Select any of the topics found, and press ENTER.
7.  Then, press F6 to move to the topic pane so you can read the information.
8.  To find out exactly where the phrase appears in the topic, press CTRL+F. Type the phrase in the JAWS find dialog box and then press ENTER. Focus moves to a line of text that contains the current search phrase. You can verify this by reading the current line with INSERT+UP ARROW. Press F3 to move to each instance of the phrase and repeat the Say Line command to hear the new text that is found. For more information on the JAWS Find feature, read the prior Surf's Up lesson on using the JAWS Find Command.

Marking Favorite Topics

You can bookmark topics you need to refer to regularly so you do not have to always look for them in the table of contents or through a search.

EXERCISE: Use the JAWS help system to add or remove a favorite topic.

1.  In JAWS, open the Help menu and choose Help Topics. Alternatively, just press F1 from within the JAWS window.
2.  Hold CTRL and press the TAB key until you hear "Table of Contents page."
3.  Select the book Using the Internet with JAWS and press RIGHT ARROW to open it.
4.  Select the book Navigating Web Pages and press RIGHT ARROW to open it.
5.  Select the topic Navigation Quick Keys and press ENTER to open this topic.
6.  Press CTRL+TAB until you hear "Favorites Page." The title of the currently opened topic is displayed.
7.  Press TAB to move to the Add button and press the SPACEBAR. Focus moves to the list of bookmarked topics which now includes the Navigation Quick Keys topic.
8.  Press ALT+F4 to close the JAWS help and then reopen it.
9.  Press CTRL+TAB until you reach the "Favorites Page" and press TAB to move to the list of bookmarked topics. The Navigation Quick Keys topic is still listed so you can press ENTER to open it and then F6 to move to the topic pane to read it. This saves you from having to navigate the table of contents to locate this topic each time you want to look up a navigation quick key.
10. To remove a favorite topic from the list, press TAB to move to the Remove button and press SPACEBAR.

Printing HTML Help Topics

To print any topic in an HTML Help system, do the following:

1.  Select the topic that you want to print in the table of contents, or find the topic using the index or search feature. Be sure to press F6 to move to the topic pane before continuing.
2.  Press CTRL+P to open the print dialog box.
3.  Select the printer you want to use, as well as any other options available. Then press ALT+P or ENTER to activate the Print button.

Moving Back to the Previous Topic

While browsing through an HTML Help system, you can do the following to return to the previous topic:

1.  Press ALT+O to open the Options menu.
2.  Press B to choose Back.

TIP: In JAWS Help, you can press ALT+B to move to the "Back" link at the bottom of each page. Press ENTER to activate this link and return to the previous page. You can also press ALT+X to move to the "Next" link at the bottom of each page. Additionally, you can also press ALT+LEFT ARROW to move to a prior HTML help page or ALT+RIGHT ARROW to move forward.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, ARIA, live regions’ lang: en title: Aria Live Regions —

[Surf's Up]

ARIA (Accessible Rich Internet Applications) Live Regions

A discussion in Surf's Up, in the Navigating Web Pages lesson, covered a component of ARIA regions that makes it easier to navigate Web pages where they are used. Another use for ARIA is to announce text that changes on the screen for screen reader users. This is done with "live regions."

ARIA live regions are used on pages that update frequently, such as stock tickers and chat logs. If the ARIA property value is not set to "off," JAWS automatically detects when the content changes and speaks all content of the region, or only that which changed, depending on how the Web page was set up. This enables you to hear items that change on the page without you losing your place and without having to move there.

Live region property values can be set to be off, polite, or assertive. The majority of the time, Web page authors will use the polite value. This, of course, depends on the priority of what is happening in that spot on the screen. If the value is set to polite, your screen reader should not be interrupted. Instead, you will hear the changes at the next opportunity, such as when you have finished reading or when you have paused typing. If the value is set to assertive, that means the new information has a high priority, and your screen reader *should* notify you immediately.

The section below this paragraph contains some short text that changes every ten (10) seconds. You do not need to move to the area where the text is changing to read it. JAWS will read it for you once you have paused whatever you are doing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The text just above this paragraph is the region that is set to change. In this example, all of the text on this part of the screen is replaced with new text each time, and all of the new text is spoken. However, some ARIA live regions may have text that stays the same as well as some text that does change. Do you want to hear all of the text in a region every time some of the text changes? Not always, but in some cases you do. Move on to the next page to get an idea of how this works.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘navigating web pages, JAWS, ARIA, live regions, live regions atomic’ lang: en title: ‘Aria Live Regions - Atomic’ —

[Surf's Up]

ARIA Live Regions - Atomic

In this example, the ARIA live region contains some static text; that is, text that does not change, as well as text that does change. We present two fictitious baseball game scores. To keep it simple, only one of the scores will change, while the rest of the text remains the same. However, if all you heard was the number of the score itself, it would be difficult to tell which team had scored. The score for the Tampa Bay Rays is the score that changes on this page. It is set to update every ten (10) seconds. You do not need to move to the area where the text is changing. JAWS will read it for you once you have paused whatever you are doing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tampa Bay Rays:
Boston Red Sox:   5

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The text just above this paragraph is the region that is set to change. In this example, only the score for the Tampa Bay Rays changes on this screen.

Thanks to Charles Chen for allowing us to use the JavaScript found in these examples of ARIA.

Back          Next

﻿— Author: ‘Freedom Scientific Training Department, a Vispero Brand’ description: This web site demonstrates the use of JAWS and Fusion on the Internet. keywords: ‘contacting Freedom Scientific, JAWS, ZoomText, Fusion, contact information’ lang: en title: Contact information for Freedom Scientific —

[Surf's Up]

Contact Information for Freedom Scientific

Thank you for joining us in Surf's Up! Surfing the Internet with JAWS! We hope you have found this practice useful to you in your real-world surfing experiences. If you have any comments or suggestions regarding these modules, please e-mail the Training department or contact Freedom Scientific at:

Freedom Scientific
17757 US Hwy 19 North
Suite 560
Clearwater, FL 33764
(800) 444-4443
(727) 803-8000

Copyright Information

Surf's Up! Surfing the Internet with JAWS is copyright © Freedom Scientific, Inc., all rights reserved. Information in these pages is subject to change without notice.

FSReader™, JAWS®, ONYX®, OpenBook®, SARA™, and TOPAZ®, are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Freedom Scientific, Inc. in the United States and/or other countries.

Microsoft®, Internet Explorer®, Windows®, MSDN®, Microsoft Excel®, and Microsoft Outlook® are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.

Adobe Reader® is a registered trademark of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or other countries.

The Mozilla® Firefox® Web browser is a registered trademark of the Mozilla Foundation.

Other product and company names mentioned herein may be trademarks of their respective owners.

Last revised 2019/09/03

Back         

﻿— lang: en title: Freedom Scientific Software Solutions —

Freedom Scientific Software Solutions

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Product: JAWS for Windows

  Description: The most popular screen reader worldwide, JAWS® screen reading software works with your computer to provide access to today’s software applications and the Internet. With its internal software speech synthesizer and the computer’s sound card, information from the screen is read aloud, providing technology to access a wide variety of information, education and job related applications. JAWS also outputs to refreshable braille displays, providing unmatched braille support of any screen reader on the market. Free Basic Training is included in full text and audio format DAISY books.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Product: Fusion

  Description: Fusion provides the best of both worlds – ZoomText®, with its screen magnification and visual enhancements for screen viewing ease, coupled with the power and speed of JAWS® for screen reading functionality. A single installer and one license gives you access to both ZoomText and JAWS individually, or together when run as the combined solution – Fusion.
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Product: ZoomText Screen Magnification

  Description: ZoomText® screen magnification software combines great magnification features with true low vision screen reading when purchased with the speech option. It gives you the ability to choose the information you want read from the screen as you navigate your applications. ZoomText is easy to use with its talking large print installation, new user interface and hot keys that avoid conflicts with Windows and popular software applications.
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Product: OpenBook

  Description: OpenBook® scanning and reading software allows you to convert printed documents or graphic based text into an electronic text format using accurate optical character recognition and quality speech. The many powerful low vision tools of OpenBook allow you to customize how the document appears on your screen, while other features provide portability.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

For more information on these and other great products, please visit www.FreedomScientific.com.

  
